## 1

When I had journeyed half of our life's way, 
I found my self within a shadowed forest, 
for I had lost the path that does not stray.

Ah, it is hard to speak of what it was, 
that savage forest, dense and difficult, 
which even in recall renews my fear:

so bitter -- death is hardly more severe! 
But to retell the good discovered there, 
I'll also tell the other things I saw.

I cannot clearly say how I had entered 
the wood; I was so full of sleep just at 
the point where I abandoned the true path.

But when I'd reached the bottom of a hill -- 
it rose along the boundary of the valley 
that had harrassed my heart with so much fear -- 

I looked on high and saw its shoulders clothed 
already by the rays of that same planet 
which serves to lead men straight along all roads.
  
At this my fear was somewhat quieted; 
for through the night of sorrow I had spent, 
the lake within my heart felt terror present.

And just as he who, with exhausted breath, 
having escaped from sea to shore, turns back 
to watch the dangerous water he has quit,

so did my spirit, still a fugitive, 
turn back to look intently at the pass 
that never has any man survive.
  
I let my tired body rest awhile.  
Moving again, I tried the lonely slope-- 
my firm foot always was the one below. 

And almost where the hillside starts to rise-- 
look there!-- a leopard, very quick and lithe, 
a leopard covered with a spotted hide.

He did not disappear from sight, but stayed; 
indeed, he so impeded my ascent 
that I had often to turn back again.

The time was the beginning of the morning; 
the sun was rising now in fellowship 
with the same stars that had escorted it

when Divine Love first moved those things of beauty; 
so that the hour and the gentle season 
gave me good cause for hopefulness on seeing


that beast before me with his speckled skin; 
but hope was hardly able to prevent the fear I felt 
when I beheld a lion.


His head held high and ravenous with hunger--
even the air around him seemed to shudder--
this lion seemed to make his way against me.

And then a she--wolf showed herself;
she seemed to carry every craving in her leanness; 
she had already brought despair to many.


The very sight of her so weighted me
with fearfulness that I abandoned hope 
of ever climbing up that mountain slope.


Even as he who glories while he gains 
will, when the time has come to tally loss, 
lament with every thought and turn despondent,


so was I when I faced that restless beast,
which, even as she stalked me, step by step 
had thrust me back to where the sun is speechless.


While I retreated down to lower ground, 
before my eyes there suddenly appeared 
one who seemed faint because of the long silence.

When I saw him in that vast wilderness, 
"Have pity on me," were the words I cried, 
"whatever you may be--a shade, a man."


He answered me: "Not man; I once was man.
Both of my parents came from Lombardy, 
and both claimed Mantua as native city.


And I was born, though late, sub Julio,
and lived in Rome under the good Augustus-- 
the season of the false and lying gods. 

I was a poet, and I sang the righteous 
son of Anchises who had come from Troy 
when flames destroyed the pride of Ilium.

But why do you return to wretchedness?  
Why not climb up the mountain of delight, 
the origin and cause of every joy?"


"And are you then that Virgil, you the fountain 
that freely pours so rich a stream of speech?"
I answered him with shame upon my brow.


"O light and honor of all other poets, 
may my long study and the intense love 
that made me search your volume serve me now.

You are my master and my author, you-- 
the only one from whom my writing drew 
the noble style for which I have been honored.

You see the beast that made me turn aside;
help me, o famous sage, to stand against her, 
for she has made my blood and pulses shudder,"


"It is another path that you must take,"
 he answered when he saw my tearfulness,
 "if you would leave this savage wilderness; 

the beast that is the cause of your outcry 
allows no man to pass along her track, 
but blocks him even to the point of death; 

her nature is so squalid, so malicious 
that she can never sate her greedy will; 
when she has fed, she's hungrier than ever.


She mates with many living souls and shall 
yet mate with many more, until the Greyhound 
arrives, inflicting painful death on her.


That Hound will never feed on land or pewter, 
but find his fare in wisdom, love, and virtue; 
his place of birth shall be between two felts.


He will restore low-lying Italy 
for which the maid Camilla died of wounds, 
and Nisus, Turnus, and Euryalus.


And he will hunt that beast through every city
 until he thrusts her back again to Hell, 
for which she was first sent above by envy.


Therefore, I think and judge it best for you 
to follow me, and I shall guide you, taking 
you from this place through an eternal place,


where you shall hear the howls of desperation 
and see the ancient spirits in their pain, 
as each of them laments his second death;


and you shall see those souls who are content 
within the fire, for they hope to reach-- 
whenever that may be-the blessed people.


If you would then ascend as high as these, 
a soul more worthy than I am will guide you; 
I'll leave you in her care when I depart,


because that Emperor who reigns above, 
since I have been rebellious to His law, 
will not allow me entry to His city.


He governs everywhere, but rules from there; 
there is His city, His high capital: 
o happy those He chooses to be there!"


And I replied: "O poet-by that God 
whom you had never come to know-- I beg you, 
that I may flee this evil and worse evils,


to lead me to the place of which you spoke, 
that I may see the gateway of Saint Peter 
and those whom you describe as sorrowful."


Then he set out, and I moved on behind him.  

## 2

The day was now departing; the dark air
released the living beings of the earth
from work and weariness; and I myself

alone prepared to undergo the battle 
both of the journeying and of the pity,
which memory, mistaking not, shall show.

O Muses, o high genius, help me now;
o memory that set down what i saw,
here shall your excellence reveal itself!

I started:"Poet, you who are my guide,
see if the force in me is strong enough
before you let me face that rugged pass.

You say that who fathered Sylvius,
while he was still corruptible, had jouneyed
into the deathless world with his live body.

For, if the Enemy of every evil
was courteous to him, considering
all he would cause and who and what he was,

that does not seem incomprehensible,
 since in the empyrean heaven he was chosen
to father honered Rome and her empire;

and if the truth be told, Rome and her realm 
were destined to become the sacred place,
the seat of the successor of great Peter.

And through the journey you ascribe to him,
he came to learn of things that were to bring
his victory and, too the papal mantle.

Later the Chosen Vessel traveled there,
to bring us back assurance of that faith
with which the way to our salvation starts.

But why should I  go there? Who sanctions it?
For I am not Aeneas, am not Paul;
nor I nor others think myself to worthy.

Therefore, if I consent to start this journey,
I fear my venture may be wild and empty.
You're wise; you know far more than what I say."

And just as he who unwills what he wills
and shifts what he intentds to seek new ends
so that he's drawn from what he had begun,

so was I in the midst of that dark land,
because, with all my thinking I annulled
the task I had so quickly undertaken.

"if I have understood what you have said," 
replied the shade of that great-hearted one,
"your soul has been assailed by cowardice." 


which often weighs so heavily on a man--
distracting him from honorable trials--
as phantoms frighten beasts when shadows fall.

That you may be dilivered from this fear,
I'll tell you why I came and what I heard
when I first felt compassion for your pain.

I was among those souls who are suspended;
a lady called to me, so blessed, so lovely
that I implored to serve at her command.

Her eyes surpasses the splendor of the star's;
and she began to speak to me-- so gentaly 
and softly -- with angelic voice. She said:

"O spirit of the courteous Mantuan,
whose fame si still a presense in the world
and shall endure as long as the world lasts,

my friend, who has not been the friend of forttune,
is hindered in his path along that lonely
hillside; he has been turned aside by terror.

From all that I have heard of him in Heaven,
he is, I fear, already so astray
that I have come to help him much too late.

Go now; with your persuative word, with all 
that is required to see that he escapes,
bring help to him, that I may bne consoled.

For I am Beatrice who send you on;
I come from where I most long to return;
Love prompted me, that Love which makes me speak.

When once again I stand before my Lord,
then I shall often let him hear your praises.'
Now Beatrice was silent. I began:

'O lady of virtue, the sole reason why 
the human race surpasses all that lies
beneath the heaven with the smallest spheres,

so welcome is your wish, that even if
it were already done, it would seem tardy
all you need do is let me now your will.

But tell me why you have not been more prudent--
descending to this center, moving from
that spacious place where you  long to return?'

'Because you want to fathom things so deeply,
I now shall tell you promptly,' she replied,
'why I am not afraid to enter here.

One ought to be afraid of nothing other
than things possessed of power to do us harm,
but things innocuous need not be feared.

God, in His graciousness, has made me so
that this, your misery, cannot touch me;
I can withstand the fires flaming here.

In Heaven there's a gentle lady-- one
who weeps for the distress toward which I send you,
so that stern judgement up above is shattered.

And it was she who called upon Lucia,
requesting of her: "Now your faithful one
has need of you, and I commend him to you."

Lucia, enemy of every cruelty,
arose and madeher way to where I was,
sitting besidethe venerable Rachel.

She said: "You, Beatric, true praise of God,
why have you not helped him who loved you so
that that-- for your sake-- he's left the vulgar crowd?

Do you not hear the anguish in his cry?
Do you not see the death he wars against
upon that river ruthless as the sea?

No none whin this world has ever been
so quick to seek his good or flee his harm
as I -- when she had finished speaking thus--

to come below, down from my blessed station;
I trusted in your honest utterance,
which honors you and those who've listened to you.'

When she had finished with her words to me, 
she turned aside her gleaming, tearful eyes,
which only made me hurry all the more.

And, just as she had wished, I came to you:
I snatched you from the path of the fierce beast
that barred the shortest way up the fair mountain.

What is it then? Why, why do you resist?
Why does your heart host so much cowardice?
Where are your daring and your openess

as long as there are three such blessed woman
concerned for you within the court of Heaven
and my words promise you so great a good?

As little flowers, which the chill of night
has bent and huddled, when the white sun strikes,
grow straight and open fully on their stems,

so did I, too, with my exhaused force;
and such warm daring ruushed into my heart
that I -- as one who has been freed--began:

"O she, compassionate, who has helped me!
And you who, courteous, obeyed so quickly
the true words that she had addressed to you!

You, with your words, have so disposed my heart
to longing for this jouney-- I return
to what I was at first prepared to do.

Now go; a single will fills both of us:
you are my guide, my governor, my master."
These were my words to him, when he advanced,



I entered on the steep and savage path.

## 3

THROUGH ME THE WAY INTO THE SUPERING CITY,
THROUGH ME THE WAY TO THE ETERNAL PAIN,
THROUGH ME THE WAY THAT RUNS AMONG THE LOST.

JUSICE URGED ON MY HIGH ARTIFICER;
MY MAKER WAS DAVINE AUTHORITY,
THE HIGHEST WISDOM, AND PRIMAL LOVE.

BEFORE ME NOTHING BUT ETERNAL THINGS
WERE MADE, AND I ENDURE ETERNALLY,
ABADON EVERY HOPE, WHO ENTER HERE. 

Those words-- their aspect was obscure-- I read
inscribed above a gateway, and I said:
"Master, their meaning is difficult for me."

And he to me, as one who comprehands;
"here one must leave behind all hesitation;
here every cowardice must meet its death.

For we have reached the place of which I spoke,
where you will see the miserable people,
those who have lost the good of the intellect,"

And when, with gladness in his face, he placed
his hand upon my own, to comfort me,
he drew me in among the hidden things.

Here sighs and lamentations and loud cries
were echoing across the starless air,
so that, as soon as I set out, I wept.

Strange utterance, horrible pronouncements,
accents of anger, words of suffering,
and voices shrill and faint, and beating hands--

all went to make a tumult that will whirl
forever through that turbid, timeless air,
like sand that eddies when a whirlwind swirls.

And I-- my head oppressed by horror--said:
"Master, what is it that I hear? Who are
those people so defaeated by their pain?"

And he to me:"This miserable way 
is taken by the sorry souls of those 
who lived without disgrace and without praise.

They now commingle with the coward angels,
the company of those who were not rebels,
nor faithful to their God, but stood apart.

The heavens, that their beauty not be lessened,
have cast them out, nor will deep Hell receive them--
even the wicked cannot glory in them."

And I:"What is it, master, that oppresses 
these souls, compelling them to wail so loud?"
He answered:" I shall tell you in few words.

Those who are here can place no hope in death,
and their blind life is so abject that they
are envious of every other fate.

The world will let no fame of theirs endure;
both justice and compassion must disdain them;
let us not talk of them, but look and pass."

And I, looking more closely, saw a banner
that, as it wheeled about, raced on -- so quick
that any respite seemed unsuited to it.

Behind that banner trailed so long a file
of people-- I should never have believed
that death could unmade so many souls.

After I had identified a few,
I saw and recognized the shade of him
who made, through cowardice, the great refusal.

At once I understood with certainty:
this company contained the cowardly,
hateful to God and to His enemies.

These wretched ones, who never were alive,
went naked and were stung again, again
by horseflies and by wasps that circled them.

The insects streaked their faces with their blood,
which, mingled with their tears, fell at their feet,
where it was gathered up by sickening worms.

And then, looking beyond them I could see
a crowd along the bank of a great river;
at which I said:"Allow me now to know

who are these people--master--and what law
has mad them seem so eager for the crossing,
as I can see despite the feeble light."

and he to me:"When we have stopped along
the melancholy shore of Acheron,
then all these matters will be plain to you."

at that, with eyes ashamed, downcast, and fearing
that what I said had given him offense,
I did not speak until we reached the river.

and here, advancing toward us, in a boat,
was shouting: "Woe to you, corrupted souls!"

Forget your hope of ever seeing Heaven:
I cme to lead you to the other shore,
to the eternal dark, to fire and frost.

And you approaching there, you living soul,
keep well away from thse--they are the dead."
But when he saw I made no move to go,

he said:"Another way and other harbors--
a lighter craft will have to carry you.

My guide then:"Charon, don't torment yourself:
our passage has been willed above, where One
can do what He has willed;and ask no more."

Now silence fell upon the wooly cheeks
of Charon, pilot of the livid marsh,
whose eyes were ringed about with wheels of flame.

But all those spirits, naked and exhaused,
had lost their color, and they gnashed their teeth
as soon as as they heard Charon's cruel words;

they execrated God and their own parents 
and humankind, and then the place and time
of theirconception's seed and of their birth.


	Then they forgathered, huddled in one throng,
weeping aloud along that wretched shore
which waits for all who have no fear of God.
 			 
	The demon Charon, with his eyes like embers,
by signaling to them, has all embark;
his oar strikes anyone who stretches out.
 			 
	As, in the autumn, leaves detach themselves,
	first one and then the other, till the bough
	sees all its fallen garments on the ground,
 			 
similarly, the evil seed of Adam
			descended from the shoreline one by one,
		when signaled, as a falcon-called-will come.
 			 
		So do they move across the darkened waters;
		even before they reach the farther shore,
		new ranks already gather on this bank.
 			 
		"My son," the gracious master said to me,
		"those who have died beneath the wrath of God,
		all these assemble here from every country;
 			 
	and they are eager for the river crossing
		because celestial justice spurs them on,
		so that their fear is turned into desire.
 			 
No good soul ever takes its passage here;
therefore, if Charon has complained of you,
by now you can be sure what his words mean."
 			 
And after this was said, the darkened plain
quaked so tremendously-the memory
of terror then, bathes me in sweat again.
 			 
A whirlwind burst out of the tear-drenched earth,
a wind that crackled with a bloodred light,
a light that overcame all of my senses;
 


			 
and like a man whom sleep has seized, I fell.


## 4


The heavy sleep within my head was smashed
by an enormous thunderclap, so that
I started up as one whom force awakens;
 			 
I stood erect and turned my rested eyes
from side to side, and I stared steadily
to learn what place it was surrounding me.
 			 
In truth I found myself upon the brink
of an abyss, the melancholy valley
			containing thundering, unending wailings.
 			 
That valley, dark and deep and filled with mist,
is such that, though I gazed into its pit,
I was unable to discern a thing.
 			 
"Let us descend into the blind world now,"
the poet, who was deathly pale, began;
"I shall go first and you will follow me."
 			 
But I, who'd seen the change in his complexion,
said: "How shall I go on if you are frightened,
you who have always helped dispel my doubts?"
 			 
And he to me: "The anguish of the people
whose place is here below, has touched my face
with the compassion you mistake for fear.
 			 
Let us go on, the way that waits is long."
So he set out, and so he had me enter
on that first circle girdling the abyss.
 			 
Here, for as much as hearing could discover,
there was no outcry louder than the sighs
that caused the everlasting air to tremble.
 			 
The sighs arose from sorrow without torments,
out of the crowds-the many multitudes-
of infants and of women and of men.
 			 
The kindly master said: "Do you not ask
who are these spirits whom you see before you?
I'd have you know, before you go ahead,
 			 
they did not sin; and yet, though they have merits,
that's not enough, because they lacked baptism,
the portal of the faith that you embrace.
 			 
And if they lived before Christianity,
they did not worship God in fitting ways;
and of such spirits I myself am one.
 			 
For these defects, and for no other evil,
we now are lost and punished just with this:
we have no hope and yet we live in longing."
 			 
Great sorrow seized my heart on hearing him,
for I had seen some estimable men
among the souls suspended in that limbo.
 			 
"Tell me, my master, tell me, lord." I then
began because I wanted to be certain
of that belief which vanquishes all errors,
 			 
"did any ever go-by his own merit
or others'- from this place toward blessedness?"
And he, who understood my covert speech,
 			 
replied: "I was new-entered on this state
when I beheld a Great Lord enter here;
the crown he wore, a sign of victory.
 			 
He carried off the shade of our first father,
of his son Abel, and the shade of Noah,
of Moses, the obedient legislator,
 			 
of father Abraham, David the king,
of Israel, his father, and his sons,
and Rachel, she for whom he worked so long,
 			 
and many others and He made them blessed;
and I should have you know that, before them,
there were no human souls that had been saved."
 			 
We did not stay our steps although he spoke;
we still continued onward through the wood-
the wood, I say, where many spirits thronged.
 			 
Our path had not gone far beyond the point
where I had slept, when I beheld a fire
win out against a hemisphere of shadows.
 			 
We still were at a little distance from it,
but not so far I could not see in part
that honorable men possessed that place.
 			 
"O you who honor art and science both,
who are these souls whose dignity has kept
their way of being, separate from the rest?"
 			 
And he to me: "The honor of their name,
which echoes up above within your life,
gains Heaven's grace, and that advances them."
 			 
Meanwhile there was a voice that I could hear:
ay honor to the estimable poet;
his shadow, which had left us, now returns."
 			 
After that voice was done, when there was silence,
I saw four giant shades approaching us;
in aspect, they were neither sad nor joyous.
 			 
My kindly master then began by saying:
"Look well at him who holds that sword in hand
who moves before the other three as lord.
 			 
That shade is Homer, the consummate poet;
the other one is Horace, satirist;
the third is Ovid, and the last is Lucan.
 			 
Because each of these spirits shares with me
the name called out before by the lone voice,
they welcome me-and, doing that, do well."
 			 
And so I saw that splendid school assembled
led by the lord of song incomparable,
who like an eagle soars above the rest.
 			 
Soon after they had talked a while together,
they turned to me, saluting cordially;
and having witnessed this, my master smiled;
 			 
and even greater honor then was mine,
for they invited me to join their ranks-
I was the sixth among such intellects.
 			 
So did we move along and toward the light,
talking of things about which silence here
is just as seemly as our speech was there.
 			 
We reached the base of an exalted castle,
encircled seven times by towering walls,
defended all around by a fair stream.
 			 
We forded this as if upon hard ground;
I entered seven portals with these sages;
we reached a meadow of green flowering plants.
 			 
The people here had eyes both grave and slow;
their features carried great authority;
they spoke infrequently, with gentle voices.
 			 
We drew aside to one part of the meadow,
an open place both high and filled with light,
and we could see all those who were assembled.
 			 
Facing me there, on the enameled green,
great-hearted souls were shown to me and I
still glory in my having witnessed them.
 			 
I saw Electra with her many comrades,
among whom I knew Hector and Aeneas,
and Caesar, in his armor, falcon-eyed.
 			 
I saw Camilla and Penthesilea
and, on the other side, saw King Latinus,
who sat beside Lavinia, his daughter.
 			 
I saw that Brutus who drove Tarquin out,
Lucretia, Julia, Marcia, and Cornelia,
and, solitary, set apart, Saladin.
 			 
When I had raised my eyes a little higher,
I saw the master of the men who know
ated in philosophic family.
 			 
There all look up to him, all do him honor:
there I beheld both Socrates and Plato,
closest to him, in front of all the rest;
 			 
Democritus, who ascribes the world to chance,
Diogenes, Empedocles, and Zeno,
and Thales, Anaxagoras, Heraclitus;
 			 
I saw the good collector of medicinals,
I mean Dioscorides; and I saw Orpheus,
and Tully, Linus, moral Seneca;
 			 
and Euclid the geometer, and Ptolemy,
Hippocrates and Galen, Avicenna,
Averroës, of the great Commentary.
 			 
I cannot here describe them all in full;
my ample theme impels me onward so:
what's told is often less than the event.
 			 
The company of six divides in two;
my knowing guide leads me another way,
beyond the quiet, into trembling air.
 			 
And I have reached a part where no thing gleams.


## 5

So I descended from the first enclosure
down to the second circle, that which girdles
less space but grief more great, that goads to weeping.
 			 
There dreadful Minos stands, gnashing his teeth:
examining the sins of those who enter,
he judges and assigns as his tail twines.
 			 
I mean that when the spirit born to evil
appears before him, it confesses all;
and he, the connoisseur of sin, can tell
 			 
the depth in Hell appropriate to it;
as many times as Minos wraps his tail
around himself, that marks the sinner's level.
 			 
Always there is a crowd that stands before him:
each soul in turn advances toward that judgment;
they speak and hear, then they are cast below.
 			 
Arresting his extraordinary task,
Minos, as soon as he had seen me, said:
"O you who reach this house of suffering,
 			 
be careful how you enter, whom you trust;
the gate is wide, but do not be deceived!"
To which my guide replied: "But why protest?
 			 
Do not attempt to block his fated path:
our passage has been willed above, where One
can do what He has willed; and ask no more."
 			 
Now notes of desperation have begun
to overtake my hearing; now I come
where mighty lamentation beats against me.
 			 
I reached a place where every light is muted,
which bellows like the sea beneath a tempest,
when it is battered by opposing winds.
 			 
The hellish hurricane, which never rests,
drives on the spirits with its violence:
wheeling and pounding, it harasses them.
 			 
When they come up against the ruined slope,
then there are cries and wailing and lament,
and there they curse the force of the divine.
 			 
I learned that those who undergo this torment
are damned because they sinned within the flesh,
subjecting reason to the rule of lust.
 			 
And as, in the cold season, starlings' wings
bear them along in broad and crowded ranks
so does that blast bear on the guilty spirits:
 			 
now here, now there, now down, now up, it drives them.
There is no hope that ever comforts them--
no hope for rest and none for lesser pain.
 			 
And just as cranes in flight will chant their lays,
arraying their long file across the air,
so did the shades I saw approaching, borne
 			 
by that assailing wind, lament and moan;
so that I asked him: "Master, who are those
who suffer punishment in this dark air?"
 			 
"The first of those about whose history
you want to know," my master then told me
"once ruled as empress over many nations.
 			 
Her vice of lust became so customary
that she made license licit in her laws
to free her from the scandal she had caused.
 			 
She is Sem&iacute;ramis, of whom we read
that she was Ninus' wife and his successor:
she held the land the Sultan now commands.
 			 
That other spirit killed herself for love,
and she betrayed the ashes of Sychaeus;
wanton Cleopatra follows next.
 			 
See Helen, for whose sake so many years
of evil had to pass; see great Achilles,
who finally met love-in his last battle.
 			 
See Paris, Tristan . . ."-and he pointed out
and named to me more than a thousand shades
departed from our life because of love.
 			 
No sooner had I heard my teacher name
the ancient ladies and the knights, than pity
seized me, and I was like a man astray.
 			 
My first words: "Poet, I should willingly
speak with those two who go together there
and seem so lightly carried by the wind."
 			 
And he to me: "You'll see when they draw closer
to us, and then you may appeal to them
by that love which impels them. They will come."
 			 
No sooner had the wind bent them toward us
I urged on my voice: "O battered souls
if One does not forbid it, speak with us."
 			 
Even as doves when summoned by desire,
borne forward by their will, move through the air
with wings uplifted, still, to their sweet nest,
 			 
	those spirits left the ranks where Dido suffers
			approaching us through the malignant air;
		so powerful had been my loving cry.
 			 
"O living being, gracious and benign,
who through the darkened air have come to visit
	our souls that stained the world with blood, if He
 			 
		who rules the universe were friend to us
			then we should pray to Him to give you peace,
		for you have pitied our atrocious state.
 			 
	Whatever pleases you to hear and speak
	will please us, too, to hear and speak with you,
	now while the wind is silent, in this place.
 			 
The land where I was born lies on that shore
to which the Po together with the waters
 follow it descends to final rest.
 			 
	Love, that can quickly seize the gentle heart,
took hold of him because of the fair body
		taken from me-how that was done: still wounds me.
 			 
	Love, that releases no beloved from loving
	took hold of me so strongly through his beauty
	that, as you see, it has not left me yet.
 			 
Love led the two of us unto one death.
Ca&iuml;na waits for him who took our life."
These words were borne across from them to us.
 			 
When I had listened to those injured souls,
I bent my head and held it low until
the poet asked of me: "What are you thinking?"
 			 
	When I replied, my words began: "Alas,
	how many gentle thoughts, how deep a longing,
	had led them to the agonizing pass!"
 			 
	Then I addressed my speech again to them,
	and I began: "Francesca, your afflictions
	move me to tears of sorrow and of pity.
 			 
But tell me, in the time of gentle sighs,
with what and in what way did Love allow you
to recognize your still uncertain longings?"
 			 
And she to me: "There is no greater sorrow
than thinking back upon a happy time
in misery and this your teacher knows.
 			 
Yet if you long so much to understand
the first root of our love, then I shall tell
my tale to you as one who weeps and speaks.
 			 
One day, to pass the time away, we read
of Lancelot--how love had overcome him.
We were alone, and we suspected nothing.
 			 
And time and time again that reading led
our eyes to meet, and made our faces pale,
and yet one point alone defeated us.
 			 
When we had read how the desired smile
was kissed by one who was so true a lover,
this one, who never shall be parted from me,
 			 
while all his body trembled, kissed my mouth.
A Gallehault indeed, that book and he
who wrote it, too; that day we read no more."
 			 
And while one spirit said these words to me,
the other wept, so that--because of pity--
I fainted, as if I had met my death.
 			 
And then I fell as a dead body falls.


## 6

Upon my mind's reviving-it had closed
on hearing the lament of those two kindred,
since sorrow had confounded me completely-
 
I see new sufferings, new sufferers
surrounding me on every side, wherever
I move or turn about or set my eyes.
 
I am in the third circle, filled with cold,
unending, heavy, and accurs&egrave;d rain;
its measure and its kind are never changed.
 
Gross hailstones, water gray with filth, and snow
come streaking down across the shadowed air;
the earth, as it receives that shower, stinks.
 
Over the souls of those submerged beneath
that mess, is an outlandish, vicious beast,
his three throats barking, doglike: Cerberus.
 
His eyes are bloodred; greasy, black, his beard;
his belly bulges, and his hands are claws;
his talons tear and flay and rend the shades.
 
That downpour makes the sinners howl like dogs;
they use one of their sides to screen the other-
those miserable wretches turn and turn.
 
When Cerberus, the great worm, noticed us,
he opened wide his mouths, showed us his fangs;
there was no part of him that did not twitch.
 
My guide opened his hands to their full span,
plucked up some earth, and with his fists filled full
he hurled it straight into those famished jaws.
 
Just as a dog that barks with greedy hunger
will then fall quiet when he gnaws his food,
intent and straining hard to cram it in,
 
so were the filthy faces of the demon
Cerberus transformed-after he'd stunned
the spirits so, they wished that they were deaf.
 
We walked across the shades on whom there thuds
that heavy rain, and set our soles upon
their empty images that seem like persons.
 
And all those spirits lay upon the ground,
except for one who sat erect as soon
as he caught sight of us in front of him.
 
"O you who are conducted through this Hell,"
he said to me, "recall me, if you can;
for you, before I was unmade, were made."
 
And I to him: "It is perhaps your anguish
that snatches you out of my memory,
so that it seems that I have never seen you.
 
But tell me who you are, you who are set
in such a dismal place, such punishment-
if other pains are more, none's more disgusting."
 
And he to me: "Your city one so full
of envy that its sack has always spilled-
that city held me in the sunlit life.
 
The name you citizens gave me was Ciacco;
and for the damning sin of gluttony,
as you can see, I languish in the rain.
 
And I, a wretched soul, am not alone,
for all of these have this same penalty
for this same sin." And he said nothing more.
 
I answered him: "Ciacco, your suffering
so weights on me that I am forced to weep;
but tell me, if you know, what end awaits
 
the citizens of that divided city;
is any just man there? Tell me the reason
why it has been assailed by so much schism."
 
And he to me: "After long controversy,
they'll come to blood; the party of the woods
will chase the other out with much offense.
 
But then, within three suns, they too must fall;
at which the other party will prevail,
using the power of one who tacks his sails.
 
This party will hold high its head for long
and heap great weights upon its enemies,
however much they weep indignantly.
 
Two men are just, but no one listens to them.
Three sparks that set on fire every heart
are envy, pride, and avariciousness."
 
With this, his words, inciting tears, were done;
and I to him: "I would learn more from you;
I ask you for a gift of further speech:
 
Tegghiaio, Farinata, men so worthy,
Arrigo, Mosca, Jacopo Rusticucci,
and all the rest whose minds bent toward the good,
 
do tell me where they are and let me meet them
for my great longing drives me on to learn
if Heaven sweetens or Hell poisons them."
 
And he: "They are among the blackest souls;
a different sin has dragged them to the bottom;
if you descend so low, there you can see them.
 
But when you have returned to the sweet world,
I pray, recall me to men's memory:
I say no more to you, answer no more."
 
Then his straight gaze grew twisted and awry;
he looked at me awhile, then bent his head;
he fell as low as all his blind companions.
 
And my guide said to me: "He'll rise no more
until the blast of the angelic trumpet
upon the coming of the hostile Judge:
 
each one shall see his sorry tomb again
and once again take on his flesh and form,
and hear what shall resound eternally."
 
So did we pass across that squalid mixture
of shadows and of rain, our steps slowed down,
talking awhile about the life to come.
 
At which I said: "And after the great sentence-
o master--will these torments grow, or else
be less, or will they be just as intense?"
 
And he to me: "Remember now your science,
which says that when a thing has more perfection,
so much the greater is its pain or pleasure.
 
Though these accursèd sinners never shall
attain the true perfection, yet they can
expect to be more perfect then than now."
 
We took the circling way traced by that road;
we said much more than I can here recount;
we reached the point that marks the downward slope.
 			 
Here we found Plutus, the great enemy.


## 7

"Pape Sat&agrave;n, Pape Sat&agrave;n aleppe!"
so Plutus, with his grating voice, began.
The gentle sage, aware of everything,
  
said reassuringly, "Don't let your fear
defeat you; for whatever power he has,
he cannot stop our climbing down this crag."
  
Then he turned back to Plutus' swollen face
and said to him: "Be quiet, cursed wolf!
Let your vindictiveness feed on yourself.
  
His is no random journey to the deep:
it has been willed on high, where Michael took
revenge upon the arrogant rebellion."
  
As sails inflated by the wind collapse,
entangled in a heap, when the mast cracks,
so that ferocious beast fell to the ground.
  
Thus we made our way down to the fourth ditch,
to take in more of that despondent shore
where all the universe's ill is stored.
  
Justice of God! Who has amassed as many
strange tortures and travails as I have seen?
Why do we let our guilt consume us so?
  
Even as waves that break above Charybdis,
each shattering the other when they meet,
so must the spirits here dance their round dance.
  
Here, more than elsewhere, I saw multitudes
to every side of me; their howls were loud
while, wheeling weights, they used their chests to push.
  
They struck against each other; at that point,
each turned around and, wheeling back those weights,
cried out: "Why do you hoard?" "Why do you squander?"
  
So did they move around the sorry circle
from left and right to the opposing point;
again, again they cried their chant of scorn;
  
and so, when each of them had changed positions,
he circled halfway back to his next joust.
And I, who felt my heart almost pierced through,
  
requested: "Master, show me now what shades
are these and tell me if they all were clerics-
those tonsured ones who circle on our left."
  
And he to me: "All these, to left and right
were so squint-eyed of mind in the first life-
no spending that they did was done with measure.
  
Their voices bark this out with clarity
when they have reached the two points of the circle
where their opposing guilts divide their ranks.
  
These to the left their heads bereft of hair-
were clergymen, and popes and cardinals,
within whom avarice works its excess."
  
And I to him: "Master, among this kind
I certainly might hope to recognize
some who have been bespattered by these crimes."
  
And he to me: "That thought of yours is empty:
the undiscerning life that made them filthy
now renders them unrecognizable.
  
For all eternity they'll come to blows:
these here will rise up from their sepulchers
with fists clenched tight; and these, with hair cropped close.
  
Ill giving and ill keeping have robbed both
of the fair world and set them to this fracas-
what that is like, my words need not embellish.
  
Now you can see, my son, how brief's the sport
of all those goods that are in Fortune's care,
for which the tribe of men contend and brawl;
  
for all the gold that is or ever was
beneath the moon could never offer rest
to even one of these exhausted spirits."
  
"Master," I asked of him, "now tell me too:
this Fortune whom you've touched upon just now-
what's she, who clutches so all the world's goods?"
  
And he to me: "O unenlightened creatures,
how deep-the ignorance that hampers you!
I want you to digest my word on this.
  
Who made the heavens and who gave them guides
was He whose wisdom transcends everything;
that every part may shine unto the other,
  
He had the light apportioned equally;
similarly, for worldly splendors, He
ordained a general minister and guide
  
to shift, from time to time, those empty goods
from nation unto nation, clan to clan,
in ways that human reason can't prevent;
  
just so, one people rules, one languishes,
obeying the decision she has given,
which, like a serpent in the grass, is hidden.
  
Your knowledge cannot stand against her force;
for she foresees and judges and maintains
her kingdom as the other gods do theirs.
  
The changes that she brings are without respite:
it is necessity that makes her swift;
and for this reason, men change state so often.
  
She is the one so frequently maligned
even by those who should give praise to her-
they blame her wrongfully with words of scorn.
  
But she is blessed and does not hear these things;
for with the other primal beings, happy,
she turns her sphere and glories in her bliss.
  
But now let us descend to greater sorrow,
for every star that rose when I first moved
is setting now; we cannot stay too long."
  
We crossed the circle to the other shore;
we reached a foaming watercourse that spills
into a trench formed by its overflow.
  
That stream was even darker than deep purple;
and we, together with those shadowed waves,
moved downward and along a strange pathway.
  
When it has reached the foot of those malign
gray slopes, that melancholy stream descends,
forming a swamp that bears the name of Styx.
  
And I, who was intent on watching it,
could make out muddied people in that slime,
all naked and their faces furious.
  
These struck each other not with hands alone,
but with their heads and chests and with their feet,
and tore each other piecemeal with their teeth.
  
The kindly master told me: "Son, now see
the souls of those whom anger has defeated;
and I should also have you know for certain
  
that underneath the water there are souls
who sigh and make this plain of water bubble,
as your eye, looking anywhere, can tell.
  
Wedged in the slime, they say: 'We had been sullen
in the sweet air that's gladdened by the sun;
we bore the mist of sluggishness in us:
  
now we are bitter in the blackened mud.'
QThis hymn they have to gurgle in their gullets,
because they cannot speak it in full words."
  
And so, between the dry shore and the swamp,
we circled much of that disgusting pond,
our eyes upon the swallowers of slime.
  
We came at last upon a tower's base.


## 8

I say, continuing, that long before
we two had reached the foot of that tall tower
our eyes had risen upward, toward its summit
  
because of two small flames that flickered there,
while still another flame returned their signal,
so far off it was scarcely visible.
  
And I turned toward the sea of all good sense;
I said: "What does this mean? And what reply
no?"comes from that other fire? Who kindled it?"
  
And he to me: "Above the filthy waters
you can already see what waits for us
if it's not hid by vapors from the marsh."
  
Bowstring has not thrust from itself an arrow
that ever rushed as swiftly through the air
as did the little bark that at that moment
  
I saw as it skimmed toward us on the water,
a solitary boatman at its helm.
I heard him howl: "Now you are caught, foul soul!"
  
"O Phlegyas, Phlegyas, such a shout is useless
this time," my master said; "we're yours no longer
than it will take to cross the muddy sluice."
  
And just as one who hears some great deception
was done to him, and then resents it, so
was Phlegyas when he had to store his anger.
  
My guide preceded me into the boat.
Once he was in, he had me follow him;
there seemed to be no weight until I boarded.
  
No sooner were my guide and I embarked
than off that ancient prow went, cutting water
more deeply than it does when bearing others.
  
And while we steered across the stagnant channel,
before me stood a sinner thick with mud,
saying: "Who are you, come before your time?"
  
And I to him: "I've come, but I don't stay;
but who are you, who have become so ugly?"
He answered: "You can see I'm one who weeps."
  
And I to him: "In weeping and in grieving,
spirito maladetto, ti rimani;accursèd spirit, may you long remain;
though you're disguised by filth, I know your name."
  
Then he stretched both his hands out toward the boat,
at which my master quickly shoved him back
saying: "Be off there with the other dogs!"
  
That done, he threw his arms around my neck
and kissed my face and said: "Indignant soul,
blessed is she who bore you in her womb!
  
When in the world, he was presumptuous;
there is no good to gild his memory,
and so his shade down here is hot with fury.
  
How many up above now count themselves
great kings, who'll wallow here like pigs in slime,
leaving behind foul memories of their crimes!"
  
And I: "O master, I am very eager
to see that spirit soused within this broth
before we've made our way across the lake."
  
And he to me: "Before the other shore
comes into view, you shall be satisfied;
to gratify so fine a wish is right."
  
Soon after I had heard these words, I saw
the muddy sinners so dismember him
that even now I praise and thank God for it.
  
They all were shouting: "At Filippo Argenti!"
At this, the Florentine, gone wild with spleen,
began to turn his teeth against himself.
  
We left him there; I tell no more of him.
But in my ears so loud a wailing pounded
that I lean forward, all intent to see.
  
The kindly master said: "My son, the city
that bears the name of Dis is drawing near,
with its grave citizens, its great battalions."
  
I said: "I can already see distinctly-
master-the mosques that gleam within the valley,
as crimson as if they had just been drawn
  
out of the fire." He told me: "The eternal
flame burning there appears to make them red,
as you can see, within this lower Hell."
  
So we arrived inside the deep-cut trenches
that are the moats of this despondent land:
the ramparts seemed to me to be of iron.
  
But not before we'd ranged in a wide circuit
did we approach a place where that shrill pilot
shouted: "Get out; the entrance way is here."
  
About the gates I saw more than a thousand-
who once had rained from Heaven-and they cried
in anger: "Who is this who, without death,
  
can journey through the kingdom of the dead?"
And my wise master made a sign that said
he wanted to speak secretly to them.
  
Then they suppressed-somewhat-their great disdain
and said: "You come alone; let him be gone
for he was reckless, entering this realm.
  
Let him return alone on his mad road
or try to, if he can, since you, his guide
across so dark a land, you are to stay."
  
Consider, reader, my dismay before
the sound of those abominable words:
returning here seemed so impossible.
  
"O my dear guide, who more than seven times
has given back to me my confidence
and snatched me from deep danger that had menaced,
  
do not desert me when I'm so undone;
and if they will not let us pass beyond,
let us retrace our steps together, quickly."
  
These were my words; the lord who'd led me there
replied: "Forget your fear, no one can hinder
our passage; One so great has granted it.
  
But you wait here for me, and feed and comfort
your tired spirit with good hope, for I
will not abandon you in this low world."
  
So he goes on his way; that gentle father
has left me there to wait and hesitate,
for yes and no contend within my head.
  
I could not hear what he was telling them;
but he had not been long with them when each
ran back into the city, scrambling fast.
  
And these, our adversaries, slammed the gates
in my lord's face; and he remained outside,
then, with slow steps, turned back again to me.
  
His eyes turned to the ground, his brows deprived
of every confidence, he said with sighs:
"See who has kept me from the house of sorrow!"
  
To me he added: "You though I am vexed
must not be daunted; I shall win this contest,
whoever tries within to block our way.
  
This insolence of theirs is nothing new;
they used it once before and at a gate
less secret-it is still without its bolts-
  
the place where you made out the fatal text;
and now, already well within that gate,
across the circles-and alone-descends
  
the one who will unlock this realm for us."

## 9

The color cowardice displayed in me
when I saw that my guide was driven back,
made him more quickly mask his own new pallor.
  
He stood alert, like an attentive listener,
because his eye could hardly journey far
across the black air and the heavy fog.
  
"We have to win this battle," he began,
"if not. . . But one so great had offered help.
How slow that someone's coming seems to me!"
  
But I saw well enough how he had covered
his first words with the words that followed after-
so different from what he had said before;
  
nevertheless, his speech made me afraid,
because I drew out from his broken phrase
a meaning worse-perhaps-than he'd intended.
  
"Does anyone from the first circle, one
whose only punishment is crippled hope,
ever descend so deep in this sad hollow?"
  
That was my question. And he answered so:
"It is quite rare for one of us to go
along the way that I have taken now.
  
But I, in truth, have been here once before:
that savage witch Erichtho, she who called
the shades back to their bodies, summoned me.
  
My flesh had not been long stripped off when she
had me descend through all the rings of Hell,
to draw a spirit back from Judas' circle.
  
That is the deepest and the darkest place,
the farthest from the heaven that girds all:
so rest assured, I know the pathway well.
  
This swamp that breeds and breathes the giant stench
surrounds the city of the sorrowing,
which now we cannot enter without anger."
  
And he said more, but I cannot remember
because my eyes had wholly taken me
to that high tower with the glowing summit
  
where, at one single point, there suddenly
stood three infernal Furies flecked with blood,
who had the limbs of women and their ways
  
but wore, as girdles, snakes of deepest green;
small serpents and horned vipers formed their hairs,
and these were used to bind their bestial temples.
  
And he, who knew these handmaids well-they served
the Queen of never-ending lamentation-
said: "Look at the ferocious Erinyes!
  
That is Megaera on the left, and she
who weeps upon the right, that is Allecto;
Tisiphone's between them." He was done.
  
Each Fury tore her breast with taloned nails;
each, with her palms, beat on herself and wailed
so loud that I, in fear, drew near the poet.
  
"Just let Medusa come; then we shall turn
him into stone," they all cried, looking down;
"we should have punished Theseus' assault."
  
"Turn round and keep your eyes shut fast, for should
the Gorgon show herself and you behold her,
never again would you return above,"
  
my master said; and he himself turned me
around,and, not content with just my hands,
used his as well to cover up my eyes.
  
O you possessed of sturdy intellects,
observe the teaching that is hidden here
beneath the veil of verses so obscure.
  
And now, across the turbid waves, there passed
a reboantic fracas-horrid sound,
enough to make both of the shorelines quake:
  
a sound not other than a wind's when, wild
because it must contend with warmer currents,
it strikes against the forest without let,
  
0shattering, beating down, bearing off branches,
it moves proudly, clouds of dust before it,
and puts to flight both animals and shepherds.
  
He freed my eyes and said: "Now let your optic
nerve turn directly toward that ancient foam,
there where the mist is thickest and most acrid."
  
As frogs confronted by their enemy,
the snake, will scatter underwater till
each hunches in a heap along the bottom,
  
so did the thousand ruined souls I saw
take flight before a figure crossing Styx
who walked as if on land and with dry soles.
  
He thrust away the thick air from his face,
waving his left hand frequently before him;
that seemed the only task that wearied him.
  
I knew well he was Heaven's messenger,
and I turned toward my master; and he made
a sign that I be still and bow before him.
  
How full of high disdain he seemed to me!
He came up to the gate, and with a wand,
he opened it, for there was no resistance.
  
"O you cast out of Heaven, hated crowd,"
were his first words upon that horrid threshold,
"why do you harbor this presumptuousness?
  
Why are you so reluctant to endure
that Will whose aim can never be cut short,
and which so often added to your hurts?
  
What good is it to thrust against the fates?
Your Cerberus, if you remember well,
for that, had both his throat and chin stripped clean."
  
At that he turned and took the filthy road,
and did not speak to us, but had the look
of one who is obsessed by other cares
  
than those that press and gnaw at those before him;
and we moved forward, on into the city,
in safety, having heard his holy words.
  
We made our way inside without a struggle;
and I, who wanted so much to observe
the state of things that such a fortress guarded,
  
as soon as I had entered, looked about.
I saw, on every side, a spreading plain
of lamentation and atrocious pain.
  
Just as at Arles, where Rhone becomes a marsh,
just as at Pola, near Quarnero's gulf,
that closes Italy and bathes its borders,
  
the sepulchers make all the plain uneven,
so they did here on every side, except
that here the sepulchers were much more harsh;
  
for flames were scattered through the tombs, and these
had kindled all of them to glowing heat;
no artisan could ask for hotter iron.
  
The lid of every tomb was lifted up,
and from each tomb such sorry cries arose
as could come only from the sad and hurt.
  
And I: "Master, who can these people be
who, buried in great chests of stone like these,
must speak by way of sighs in agony?"
  
And he to me: "Here are arch-heretics
and those who followed them, from every sect;
those tombs are much more crowded than you think.
  
Here, like has been ensepulchered with like;
some monuments are heated more, some less."
And then he turned around and to his right;
  
we passed between the torments and high walls.


## 10

Now, by a narrow path that ran between
those torments and the ramparts of the city,
my master moves ahead, I following.
  
"O highest virtue, you who lead me through
these circles of transgression, at your will,
do speak to me, and satisfy my longings.
  
Can those who lie within the sepulchers
be seen? The lids in fact have all been lifted;
no guardian is watching over them."
  
And he to me: "They'll all be shuttered up
when they return here from Jehosaphat
together with the flesh they left above.
  
Within this region is the cemetery
of Epicurus and his followers,
all those who say the soul dies with the body.
  
And so the question you have asked of me
will soon find satisfaction while we're here,
as will the longing you have hid from me."
  
And I: "Good guide, the only reason I
have hid my heart was that I might speak briefly,
and you, long since, encouraged me in this."
  
"O Tuscan, you who pass alive across
the fiery city with such seemly words,
be kind enough to stay your journey here.
  
Your accent makes it clear that you belong
among the natives of the noble city
I may have dealt with too vindictively."
  
This sound had burst so unexpectedly
out of one sepulcher that, trembling, I
then drew a little closer to my guide.
  
But he told me: "Turn round! What are you doing?
That's Farinata who has risen there-
you will see all of him from the waist up."
  
My eyes already were intent on his;
and up he rose his forehead and his chest-
com' avesse l'inferno a gran dispitto.as if he had tremendous scorn for Hell.
  
E l'animose man del duca e pronte10.37My guide-his hands encouraging and quick-
thrust me between the sepulchers toward him,
saying: "Your words must be appropriate."
  
When I'd drawn closer to his sepulcher,
he glanced at me, and as if in disdain,
he asked of me: "Who were your ancestors?"
  
Because I wanted so to be compliant,
I hid no thing from him: I told him all.
At this he lifted up his brows a bit,
  
then said: "They were ferocious enemies
of mine and of my parents and my party,
so that I had to scatter them twice over."
  
"If they were driven out," I answered him,
"they still returned, both times, from every quarter;
but yours were never quick to learn that art."
  
At this there rose another shade alongside,
uncovered to my sight down to his chin;
I think that he had risen on his knees.
  
He looked around me, just as if he longed
to see if I had come with someone else;
but then, his expectation spent, he said
  
in tears: "If it is your high intellect
that lets you journey here, through this blind prison,
where is my son? Why is he not with you?"
  
I answered: "My own powers have not brought me;
he who awaits me there, leads me through here
perhaps to one your Guido did disdain."
  
His words, the nature of his punishment-
these had already let me read his name;
therefore, my answer was so fully made.
  
Then suddenly erect, he cried: "What's that:
He 'did disdain'? He is not still alive?
The sweet light does not strike against his eyes?"
  
And when he noticed how I hesitated
a moment in my answer, he fell back-
supine and did not show himself again.
  
But that great-hearted one, the other shade
at whose request I'd stayed, did not change aspect
or turn aside his head or lean or bend;
  
and taking up his words where-he'd left off,
"If they were slow," he said, "to learn that art,
that is more torment to me than this bed.
  
And yet the Lady who is ruler here
will not have her face kindled fifty times
before you learn how heavy is that art.
  
And so may you return to the sweet world,
tell me: why are those citizens so cruel
against my kin in all of their decrees?"
  
To which I said: "The carnage, the great bloodshed
that stained the waters of the Arbia red
have led us to such prayers in our temple."
  
He sighed and shook his head, then said: "In that,
I did not act alone, but certainly
I'd not have joined the others without cause.
  
But where I was alone was there where all
the rest would have annihilated Florence,
had I not interceded forcefully."
  
"Ah, as I hope your seed may yet find peace,"
I asked, "so may you help me to undo
the knot that here has snarled my course of thought.
  
It seems, if I hear right, that you can see
beforehand that which time is carrying,
but you're denied the sight of present things."
  
"We see, even as men who are farsighted,
those things," he said, "that are remote from us;
the Highest Lord allots us that much light.
  
But when events draw near or are, our minds
are useless; were we not informed by others,
we should know nothing of your human state.
  
So you can understand how our awareness
will die completely at the moment when
the portal of the future has been shut."
  
Then, as if penitent for my omission,
I said: "Will you now tell that fallen man
his son is still among the living ones;
  
and if, a while ago, I held my tongue
before his question, let him know it was
because I had in mind the doubt you've answered."
  
And now my master was recalling me;
so that, more hurriedly, I asked the spirit
to name the others who were there with him.
  
He said: "More than a thousand lie with me:
the second Frederick is but one among them,
as is the Cardinal; I name no others."
  
With that, he hid himself; and pondering
he speech that seemed to me so menacing,
I turned my steps to meet the ancient poet.
  
He moved ahead, and as we made our way,
he said to me: "Why are you so dismayed?"
I satisfied him, answering him fully.
  
And then that sage exhorted me: "Remember
the words that have been spoken here against you.
Now pay attention," and he raised his finger;
  
"when you shall stand before the gentle splendor
of one whose gracious eyes see everything,
then you shall learn-from her-your lifetime's journey."
  
Following that, his steps turned to the left,
leaving the wall and moving toward the middle
along a path that strikes into a valley
  
whose stench, as it rose up, disgusted us.

## 11

Along the upper rim of a high bank
formed by a ring of massive broken boulders,
we came above a crowd more cruelly pent.
 			 
And here, because of the outrageous stench
thrown up in excess by that deep abyss,
we drew back till we were behind the lid
 			 
of a great tomb, on which I made out this,
inscribed: "I hold Pope Anastasius,
enticed to leave the true path by Photinus."
 			 
"It would be better to delay descent
so that our senses may grow somewhat used
to this foul stench; and then we can ignore it."
 			 
So said my master, and I answered him:
"Do find some compensation, lest this time
be lost." And he: "You see, I've thought of that."
 			 
"My son, within this ring of broken rocks,"
he then began, "there are three smaller circles;
like those that you are leaving, they range down.
 			 
Those circles are all full of cursed spirits;
so that your seeing of them may suffice,
learn now the how and why of their confinement.
 			 
Of every malice that earns hate in Heaven,
injustice is the end; and each such end
by force or fraud brings harm to other men.
 			 
However, fraud is man's peculiar vice;
God finds it more displeasing-and therefore,
the fraudulent are lower, suffering more.
 			 
The violent take all of the first circle;
but since one uses force against three persons,
that circle's built of three divided rings.
 			 
To God and to one's self and to one's neighbor-
I mean, to them or what is theirs-one can
do violence, as you shall now hear clearly.
 			 
Violent death and painful wounds may be
inflicted on one's neighbor; his possessions
may suffer ruin, fire, and extortion;
 			 
thus, murderers and those who strike in malice,
as well as plunderers and robbers these,
in separated ranks, the first ring racks.
 			 
A man can set violent hands against
himself or his belongings; so within
the second ring repents, though uselessly,
 			 
whoever would deny himself your world,
gambling away, wasting his patrimony,
and weeping where he should instead be happy.
 			 
One can be violent against the Godhead,
one's heart denying and blaspheming Him
and scorning nature and the good in her;
 			 
so, with its sign, the smallest ring has sealed
both Sodom and Cahors and all of those
who speak in passionate contempt of God.
 			 
Now fraud, that eats away at every conscience,
is practiced by a man against another
who trusts in him, or one who has no trust.
 			 
This latter way seems only to cut off
the bond of love that nature forges; thus,
nestled within the second circle are:
 			 
hypocrisy and flattery, sorcerers,
and falsifiers, simony, and theft,
and barrators and panders and like trash.
 			 
But in the former way of fraud, not only
the love that nature forges is forgotten, but
added love that builds a special trust;
 			 
thus, in the tightest circle, where there is
the universe's center, seat of Dis,
all traitors are consumed eternally."
 			 
"Master, your reasoning is clear indeed,"
I said; "it has made plain for me the nature
of this pit and the population in it.
 			 
But tell me: those the dense marsh holds, or those
driven before the wind, or those on whom
rain falls, or those who clash with such harsh tongues,
 			 
why are they not all punished in the city;
of flaming red if God is angry with them?
And if He's not, why then are they tormented?"
 			 
And then to me, "Why does your reason wander
so far from its accustomed course?" he said.
"Or of what other things are you now thinking?
 			 
Have you forgotten, then. the words with which
con le quai la tua Etica pertratta			your Ethics treats of those three dispositions
le tre disposizion che 'l ciel non vole,			that strike at Heaven's will: incontinence
 			 
incontenenza, malizia e la matta	11.82		and malice and mad bestiality?
bestialitade? e come incontenenza			And how the fault that is the least condemned
men Dio offende e men biasimo accatta?			and least offends God is incontinence?
 			 
If you consider carefully this judgment
and call to mind the souls of upper Hell,
who bear their penalties outside this city,
 			 
you'll see why they have been set off from these
unrighteous ones, and why, when heaven's vengeance
hammers at them, it carries lesser anger."
 			 
"O sun that heals all sight that is perplexed,
when I ask you, your answer so contents
that doubting pleases me as much as knowing.
 			 
Go back a little to that point," I said,
"where you told me that usury offends
divine goodness; unravel now that knot."
 			 
"Philosophy, for one who understands,
points out, and not in just one place," he said,
"how nature follows-as she takes her course-
 			 
the Divine Intellect and Divine Art;
and if you read your Physics carefully,
not many pages from the start, you'll see
 			 
that when it can, your art would follow nature,
just as a pupil imitates his master;
so that your art is almost God's grandchild.
 			 
From these two, art and nature, it is fitting,
if you recall how Genesis begins,
for men to make their way, to gain their living;
 			 
and since the usurer prefers another
pathway, he scorns both nature in herself
and art her follower; his hope is elsewhere.
 			 
But follow me, for it is time to move;
the Fishes glitter now on the horizon
all the Wain is spread out over Caurus;
 			 
only beyond, can one climb down the cliff."

## 12


The place that we had reached for our descent
along the bank was alpine; what reclined
upon that bank would, too, repel all eyes.

Just like the toppled mass of rock that struck-
because of earthquake or eroded props-
the Adige on its flank, this side of Trent,

where from the mountain top from which it thrust
down to the plain, the rock is shattered so
that it permits a path for those above:

such was the passage down to that ravine.
And at the edge above the cracked abyss,
e lay outstretched the infamy of Crete,

conceived within the counterfeited cow;
and, catching sight of us, he bit himself
like one whom fury devastates within.

Turning to him, my sage cried out: "Perhaps
you think this is the Duke of Athens here,
who, in the world above, brought you your death.

Be off, you beast; this man who comes has not
been tutored by your sister; all he wants
in coming here is to observe your torments."

Just as the bull that breaks loose from its halter
the moment it receives the fatal stroke,
and cannot run but plunges back and forth,

so did I see the Minotaur respond;
and my alert guide cried: "Run toward the pass;
it's better to descend while he's berserk."

And so we made our way across that heap
of stones, which often moved beneath my feet
because my weight was somewhat strange for them.

While climbing down, I thought. He said: "You wonder,
perhaps, about that fallen mass, watched over
by the inhuman rage I have just quenched.

Now I would have you know: the other time
that I descended into lower Hell,
this mass of boulders had not yet collapsed;

but if I reason rightly, it was just
before the coming of the One who took
from Dis the highest circle's splendid spoils

that, on all sides, the steep and filthy valley
had trembled so, I thought the universe
felt love (by which, as some believe, the world

has often been converted into chaos);
and at that moment, here as well as elsewhere,
these ancient boulders toppled, in this way.

But fix your eyes below, upon the valley,
for now we near the stream of blood, where those
who injure others violently, boil."

O blind cupidity and insane anger,
which goad us on so much in our short life,
then steep us in such grief eternally!

I saw a broad ditch bent into an arc
so that it could embrace all of that plain,
precisely as my guide had said before;

between it and the base of the embankment
raced files of Centaurs who were armed with arrows,
as, in the world above, they used to hunt.

On seeing us descend, they all reined in;
and, after they had chosen bows and shafts,
three of their number moved out from their ranks;

and still far off, one cried: "What punishment
do you approach as you descend the slope?
But speak from there; if not, I draw my bow."

My master told him: "We shall make reply
only to Chiron, when we reach his side;
your hasty will has never served you well."

Then he nudged me and said: "That one is Nessus,
who died because of lovely Deianira
and of himself wrought vengeance for himself.

And in the middle, gazing at his chest,
is mighty Chiron, tutor of Achilles;
the third is Pholus, he who was so frenzied.

And many thousands wheel around the moat,
their arrows aimed at any soul that thrusts
above the blood more than its guilt allots."

By now we had drawn near those agile beasts;
Chiron drew out an arrow; with the notch,
he parted his beard back upon his jaws.

When he'd uncovered his enormous mouth,
he said to his companions: "Have you noticed
how he who walks behind moves what he touches?

Dead soles are not accustomed to do that."
And my good guide-now near the Centaur's chest,
the place where his two natures met-replied:

"He is indeed alive, and so alone
it falls to me to show him the dark valley.
Necessity has brought him here, not pleasure.

For she who gave me this new task was one
who had just come from singing halleluiah:
he is no robber; I am not a thief.

But by the Power that permits my steps
to journey on so wild a path, give us
one of your band, to serve as our companion;

and let him show us where to ford the ditch,
and let him bear this man upon his back,
for he's no spirit who can fly through air."

Then Chiron wheeled about and right and said
to Nessus: "Then, return and be their guide;
if other troops disturb you, fend them off."

Now, with our faithful escort, we advanced
along the bloodred, boiling ditch's banks,
beside the piercing cries of those who boiled.

I saw some who were sunk up to their brows,
and that huge Centaur said: "These are the tyrants
who plunged their hands in blood and plundering.

Here they lament their ruthless crimes; here are
both Alexander and the fierce Dionysius,
who brought such years of grief to Sicily.

That brow with hair so black is Ezzelino;
that other there, the blonde one, is Obizzo
of Este, he who was indeed undone,

within the world above, by his fierce son."
Then I turned to the poet, and he said:
"Now let him be your first guide, me your second."

A little farther on, the Centaur stopped
above a group that seemed to rise above
the boiling blood as far up as their throats.

He pointed out one shade, alone, apart,
and said: "Within God's bosom, he impaled
the heart that still drips blood upon the Thames."

Then I caught sight of some who kept their heads
and even their full chests above the tide;
among them-many whom I recognized.

And so the blood grew always shallower
until it only scorched the feet; and here
we found a place where we could ford the ditch.

"Just as you see that, on this side, the brook
continually thins," the Centaur said,
"so I should have you know the rivulet,

along the other side, will slowly deepen
its bed, until it reaches once again
the depth where tyranny must make lament.

And there divine justice torments Attila
he who was such a scourge upon the earth,
and Pyrrhus, Sextus; to eternity

it milks the tears that boiling brook unlocks
from Rinier of Corneto, Rinier Pazzo,
those two who waged such war upon the highroads."

Then he turned round and crossed the ford again.


## 13


Nessus had not yet reached the other bank
when we began to make our way across
a wood on which no path had left its mark.

No green leaves in that forest, only black:
no branches straight and smooth, but knotted, gnarled;
no fruits were there, but briers bearing poison.

Even those savage beasts that roam between
Cecina and Corneto, beasts that hate
tilled lands, do not have holts so harsh and dense.

This is the nesting place of the foul Harpies,
who chased the Trojans from the Strophades
with sad foretelling of their future trials.

Their wings are wide, their necks and faces human;
their feet are taloned, their great bellies feathered;
they utter their laments on the strange trees.

And my kind master then instructed me:
"Before you enter farther know that now
you are within the second ring and shall

be here until you reach the horrid sand;
therefore look carefully; you'll see such things
as would deprive my speech of all belief."

From every side I heard the sound of cries,
but I could not see any source for them,
so that, in my bewilderment, I stopped.

I think that he was thinking that I thought
so many voices moaned among those trunks
from people who had been concealed from us.

Therefore my master said: "If you would tear
a little twig from any of these plants,
the thoughts you have will also be cut off."

Then I stretched out my hand a little way
and from a great thornbush snapped off a branch,
at which its trunk cried out: "Why do you tear me?"

13.34		And then, when it had grown more dark blood,
it asked again: "Why do you break me off?
Are you without all sentiment of pity?

We once were men and now are arid stumps:
your hand might well have shown us greater mercy
had we been nothing more than souls of serpents."

As from a sapling log that catches fire
along one of its ends, while at the other
it drips and hisses with escaping vapor,

so from that broken stump issued together
both words and blood; at which I let the branch
fall, and I stood like one who is afraid.

My sage said: "Wounded soul, if, earlier,
he had been able to believe what he
had only glimpsed within my poetry,

then he would not have set his hand against you;
but its incredibility made me
urge him to do a deed that grieves me deeply.

But tell him who you were, so that he may,
to make amends, refresh your fame within
the world above, where he can still return."

To which the trunk: "Your sweet speech draws me so
that I cannot be still; and may it not
oppress you, if I linger now in talk.

I am the one who guarded both the keys
of Frederick's heart and turned them, locking and
unlocking them with such dexterity

that none but I could share his confidence;
and I was faithful to my splendid office,
so faithful that I lost both sleep and strength.

The whore who never turned her harlot's eyes
away from Caesar's dwelling, she who is
the death of all and vice of every court,

inflamed the minds of everyone against me;
and those inflamed, then so inflamed Augustus
that my delighted honors turned to sadness.

My mind, because of its disdainful temper,
believing it could flee disdain through death,
made me unjust against my own just self.

I swear to you by the peculiar roots
of this thornbush, I never broke my faith
with him who was so worthy-with my lord.

If one of you returns into the world,
then let him help my memory, which still
lies prone beneath the battering of envy."

The poet waited briefly, then he said
to me: "Since he is silent, do not lose
this chance, but speak and ask what you would know."

And I: "Do you continue; ask of him
whatever you believe I should request;
I cannot, so much pity takes my heart."

Then he began again: "Imprisoned spirit,
so may this man do freely what you ask,
may it please you to tell us something more

of how the soul is bound into these knots;
and tell us, if you can, if any one
can ever find his freedom from these limbs."

At this the trunk breathed violently, then
that wind became this voice: "You shall be answered
promptly. When the savage spirit quits

the body from which it has torn itself,
then Minos sends it to the seventh maw.
It falls into the wood, and there's no place

to which it is allotted, but wherever
fortune has flung that soul, that is the space
where, even as a grain of spelt, it sprouts.

It rises as a sapling, a wild plant;
and then the Harpies, feeding on its leaves,
cause pain and for that pain provide a vent.

Like other souls, we shall seek out the flesh
that we have left, but none of us shall wear it;
it is not right for any man to have

what he himself has cast aside. We'll drag
our bodies here; they'll hang in this sad wood,
each on the stump of its vindictive shade."

And we were still intent upon the trunk-
believing it had wanted to say more-
when we were overtaken by a roar,

just as the hunter is aware of chase
and boar as they draw near his post-he hears
the beasts and then the branches as they crack.

And there upon the left were two who, scratched
and naked, fled so violently that they
tore away each forest bough they passed.

The one in front: "Now come, death, quickly come!"
The other shade, who thought himself too slow,
was shouting after him: "Lano, your legs

were not so nimble at the jousts of Toppo!"
And then, perhaps because he'd lost his breath,
he fell into one tangle with a bush.

Behind these two, black bitches filled the wood,
and they were just as eager and as swift
as greyhounds that have been let off their leash.

They set their teeth in him where he had crouched;
and, piece by piece, those dogs dismembered him
and carried off his miserable limbs.

Then he who was my escort took my hand;
he led me to the lacerated thorn
that wept in vain where it was bleeding, broken.

"O Jacopo," it said, "da Santo Andrea,
what have you gained by using me as screen?
Am I to blame for your indecent life?"

When my good master stood beside that bush,
he said: "Who were you, who through many wounds
must breathe with blood your melancholy words?"

And he to us: "O spirits who have come
to witness the outrageous laceration
that leaves so many of my branches torn,

collect them at the foot of this sad thorn.
My home was in the city whose first patron
gave way to John the Baptist; for this reason,

he'll always use his art to make it sorrow;
and if-along the crossing of the Arno-
some effigy of Mars had not remained,

those citizens who afterward rebuilt
their city on the ashes that Attila
had left to them, would have travailed in vain.

I made-of my own house-my gallows place."


## 14

Love of our native city overcame me;
I gathered up the scattered boughs and gave
them back to him whose voice was spent already.

From there we reached the boundary that divides
the second from the third ring-and the sight
of a dread work that justice had devised.

To make these strange things clear, I must explain
that we had come upon an open plain
that banishes all green things from its bed.

The wood of sorrow is a garland round it,
just as that wood is ringed by a sad channel;
here, at the very edge, we stayed our steps.

The ground was made of sand, dry and compact,
a sand not different in kind from that
on which the feet of Cato had once tramped.

O vengeance of the Lord, how you should be
dreaded by everyone who now can read
whatever was made manifest to me!

I saw so many flocks of naked souls,
all weeping miserably, and it seemed
that they were ruled by different decrees.

Some lay upon the ground, flat on their backs;
some huddled in a crouch, and there they sat;
and others moved about incessantly.

The largest group was those who walked about,
the smallest, those supine in punishment;
but these had looser tongues to tell their torment.

Above that plain of sand, distended flakes
of fire showered down; their fall was slow-
as snow descends on alps when no wind blows.

Just like the flames that Alexander saw
in India's hot zones, when fires fell,
intact and to the ground, on his battalions,

for which-wisely-he had his soldiers tramp
the soil to see that every fire was spent
before new flames were added to the old;

so did the never-ending heat descend;
with this, the sand was kindled just as tinder
on meeting flint will flame-doubling the pain.

The dance of wretched hands was never done;
now here, now there, they tried to beat aside
the fresh flames as they fell. And I began

to speak: "My master, you who can defeat
all things except for those tenacious demons
who tried to block us at the entryway,

who is that giant there, who does not seem
to heed the singeing-he who lies and scorns
and scowls, he whom the rains can't seem to soften?"

And he himself, on noticing that I
was querying my guide about him, cried:
"That which I was in life, I am in death.

Though Jove wear out the smith from whom he took,
in wrath, the keen-edged thunderbolt with which
on my last day I was to be transfixed;

or if he tire the others, one by one,
in Mongibello, at the sooty forge,
while bellowing: 'O help, good Vulcan, help!'-

just as he did when there was war at Phlegra-
and casts his shafts at me with all his force,
not even then would he have happy vengeance."

Then did my guide speak with such vehemence
as I had never heard him use before:
"O Capaneus, for your arrogance

that is not quenched, you're punished all the more:
no torture other than your own madness
could offer pain enough to match your wrath."

But then, with gentler face he turned to me
and said: "That man was one of seven kings
besieging Thebes; he held-and still, it seems,

holds-God in great disdain, disprizing Him;
but as I told him now, his maledictions
sit well as ornaments upon his chest.

Now follow me and-take care-do not set
your feet upon the sand that's burning hot,
but always keep them back, close to the forest."

In silence we had reached a place where flowed
a slender watercourse out of the wood-
a stream whose redness makes me shudder still.

As from the Bulicame pours a brook
whose waters then are shared by prostitutes,
so did this stream run down across the sand.

Its bed and both its banks were made of stone,
together with the slopes along its shores,
so that I saw our passageway lay there.

"Among all other things that I have shown you
since we first made our way across the gate
whose threshold is forbidden to no one,

no thing has yet been witnessed by your eyes
as notable as this red rivulet,
which quenches every name that burns above it.

These words were spoken by my guide; at this,
I begged him to bestow the food for which
he had already given me the craving.

"A devastated land lies in midsea,
a land that is called Crete," he answered me.
"Under its king the world once lived chastely.

Within that land there was a mountain blessed
with leaves and waters, and they called it Ida;
but it is withered now like some old thing.

It once was chosen as a trusted cradle
by Rhea for her son; to hide him better,
when he cried out, she had her servants clamor.

Within the mountain is a huge Old Man,
who stands erect-his back turned toward Damietta-
and looks at Rome as if it were his mirror.

The Old Man's head is fashioned of fine gold,
the purest silver forms his arms and chest,
but he is made of brass down to the cleft;

below that point he is of choicest iron
except for his right foot, made of baked clay;
and he rests more on this than on the left.

Each part of him, except the gold, is cracked;
and down that fissure there are tears that drip;
when gathered, they pierce through that cavern's floor

and, crossing rocks into this valley, form
the Acheron and Styx and Phlegethon;
and then they make their way down this tight channel,

and at the point past which there's no descent,
they form Cocytus; since you are to see
what that pool is, I'll not describe it here."

And I asked him: "But if the rivulet
must follow such a course down from our world,
why can we see it only at this boundary?"

And he to me: "You know this place is round;
and though the way that you have come is long,
and always toward the left and toward the bottom,

you still have not completed all the circle:
so that, if something new appears to us,
it need not bring such wonder to your face."

And I again: "Master, where's Phlegethon
and where is Lethe? You omit the second
and say this rain of tears has formed the first."

"I'm pleased indeed," he said, "with all your questions;
yet one of them might well have found its answer
already-when you saw the red stream boiling.

You shall see Lethe, but past this abyss,
here where the spirits go to cleanse themselves
when their repented guilt is set aside."

Then he declared: "The time has come to quit
this wood; see that you follow close behind me;
these margins form a path that does not scorch,

and over them, all flaming vapor is quenched."

## 15

Now one of the hard borders bears us forward;
the river mist forms shadows overhead
and shields the shores and water from the fire.

Just as between Wissant and Bruges, the Flemings,
in terror of the tide that floods toward them,
have built a wall of dykes to daunt the sea;
 
and as the Paduans, along the Brenta,
build bulwarks to defend their towns and castles
before the dog days fall on Carentana;
 
just so were these embankments, even though
they were not built so high and not so broad,
whoever was the artisan who made them.
 
By now we were so distant from the wood
that I should not have made out where it was-
not even if I'd turned around to look-
 
when we came on a company of spirits
who made their way along the bank; and each
stared steadily at us, as in the dusk,
 
beneath the new moon, men look at each other.
They knit their brows and squinted at us-just
as an old tailor at his needle's eye.
 
And when that family looked harder, I
was recognized by one, who took me by
the hem and cried out: "This is marvelous!"
 
That spirit having stretched his arm toward me,
I fixed my eyes upon his baked, brown features,
so that the scorching of his face could not
 
prevent my mind from recognizing him;
and lowering my face to meet his face,
I answered him: "Are you here, Ser Brunetto?"
 
And he: "My son, do not mind if Brunetto
Latino lingers for a while with you
and lets the file he's with pass on ahead."
 
I said: "With all my strength I pray you, stay;
and if you'd have me rest awhile with you,
I shall, if that please him with whom I go."
 
"O son," he said, "whoever of this flock
stops but a moment, stays a hundred years
and cannot shield himself when fire strikes.
 
Therefore move on; below-but close-I'll follow;
and then I shall rejoin my company,
who go lamenting their eternal sorrows."
 
I did not dare to leave my path for his
own level; but I walked with head bent low
as does a man who goes in reverence.
 
And he began: "What destiny or chance
has led you here below before your last
day came, and who is he who shows the way?"
 
"There, in the sunlit life above," I answered,
"before my years were full, I went astray
within a valley. Only yesterday
 
at dawn I turned my back upon it-but
when I was newly lost, he here appeared,
to guide me home again along this path."
 
And he to me: "If you pursue your star,
you cannot fail to reach a splendid harbor,
if in fair life, I judged you properly;
 
and if I had not died too soon for this,
on seeing Heaven was so kind to you,
I should have helped sustain you in your work.
 
But that malicious, that ungrateful people
come down, in ancient times, from Fiesole-
still keeping something of the rock and mountain-
 
for your good deeds, will be your enemy:
and there is cause-among the sour sorbs,
the sweet fig is not meant to bear its fruit.
 
The world has long since called them blind, a people
presumptuous, avaricious, envious;
be sure to cleanse yourself of their foul ways.
 
Your fortune holds in store such honor for you,
one party and the other will be hungry
for you-but keep the grass far from the goat.

For let the beasts of Fiesole find forage
among themselves, and leave the plant alone-
if still, among their dung, it rises up-

in which there lives again the sacred seed
of those few Romans who remained in Florence
when such a nest of wickedness was built."

"If my desire were answered totally,"
I said to Ser Brunetto, "you'd still be
among, not banished from, humanity.

Within my memory is fixed-and now
moves me--your dear, your kind paternal image
when, in the world above, from time to time

you taught me how man makes himself eternal;
and while I live, my gratitude for that
must always be apparent in my words.

What you have told me of my course, I write;
I keep it with another text, for comment
by one who'll understand, if I may reach her.

One thing alone I'd have you plainly see:
so long as I am not rebuked by conscience,
I stand prepared for Fortune, come what may.

My ears find no new pledge in that prediction;
therefore, let Fortune turn her wheel as she
may please, and let the peasant turn his mattock."

At this, my master turned his head around
and toward the right, and looked at me and said:
"He who takes note of this has listened well."

But nonetheless, my talk with Ser Brunetto
continues, and I ask of him who are
his comrades of repute and excellence.

And he to me: "To know of some is good;
but for the rest, silence is to be praised;
the time we have is short for so much talk.

In brief, know that my company has clerics
and men of letters and of fame and all
were stained by one same sin upon the earth.

That sorry crowd holds Priscian and Francesco
d'Accorso; and among them you can see,
if you have any longing for such scurf,

the one the Servant of His Servants sent
from the Arno to the Bacchiglione's banks,
and there he left his tendons strained by sin.
 
I would say more; but both my walk and words
must not be longer, for-beyond-I see
new smoke emerging from the sandy bed.
 
Now people come with whom I must not be.
Let my Tesoro, in which I still live,
be precious to you; and I ask no more."
 
And then he turned and seemed like one of those
who race across the fields to win the green
cloth at Verona; of those runners, he
 
appeared to be the winner, not the loser.
 			 

## 16

No sooner had I reached the place where one
could hear a murmur, like a beehive's hum,
of waters as they fell to the next circle,

when, setting out together, three shades ran,
leaving another company that passed
beneath the rain of bitter punishment.

They came toward us, and each of them cried out:
"Stop, you who by your clothing seem to be
someone who comes from our indecent country!"

Ah me, what wounds I saw upon their limbs,
wounds new and old, wounds that the flames seared in!
It pains me still as I remember it.

When they cried out, my master paid attention;
he turned his face toward me and then he said:
"Now wait: to these one must show courtesy.

And were it not the nature of this place
for shafts of fire to fall, I'd say that haste
was seemlier for you than for those three."

As soon as we stood still, they started up
their ancient wail again; and when they reached us,
they formed a wheel, all three of them together.

As champions, naked, oiled, will always do,
each studying the grip that serves him best
before the blows and wounds begin to fall,

while wheeling so, each one made sure his face
 			was turned to me, so that their necks opposed
their feet in one uninterrupted flow.

And, "If the squalor of this shifting sand,
together with our baked and barren features,
makes us and our requests contemptible,"

one said, "then may our fame incline your mind
to tell us who you are, whose living feet
can make their way through Hell with such assurance.

He in whose steps you see me tread, although
he now must wheel about both peeled and naked,
was higher in degree than you believe:

he was a grandson of the good Gualdrada,
and Guido Guerra was his name; in life his sword and
his good sense accomplished much.

The other who, behind me, tramples sand-
Tegghiaio Aldobrandi, one whose voice
should have been heeded in the world above.

And I, who share this punishment with them,
was Jacopo Rusticucci; certainly,
more than all else, my savage wife destroyed me."

If I'd had shield and shelter from the fire,
I should have thrown myself down there among them-
I think my master would have sanctioned that;

but since that would have left me burned and baked,
my fear won out against the good intention
that made me so impatient to embrace them.

Then I began: "Your present state had fixed
not scorn but sorrow in me-and so deeply
that it will only disappear slowly-

as soon as my lord spoke to me with words
that made me understand what kind of men
were coming toward us, men of worth like yours.

For I am of your city; and with fondness,
I've always told and heard the others tell
of both your actions and your honored names.

I leave the gall and go for the sweet apples
that I was promised by my truthful guide;
but first I must descend into the center."

"So may your soul long lead your limbs and may
your fame shine after you," he answered then,
"tell us if courtesy and valor still
bide within our city as they did
when we were there, or have they disappeared
completely; for Guiglielmo Borsiere,

who only recently has come to share
our torments, and goes there with our companions,
has caused us much affliction with his words "

"Newcomers to the city and quick gains
have brought excess and arrogance to you,
o Florence, and you weep for it already!"

So I cried out with face upraised; the three
looked at each other when they heard my answer
as men will stare when they have heard the truth.

"If you can always offer a reply
so readily to others," said all three,
"then happy you who speak, at will, so clearly.

So, if you can escape these lands of darkness
and see the lovely stars on your return,
when you repeat with pleasure, 'I was there,'

be sure that you remember us to men."
At this they broke their wheel; and as they fled,
their swift legs seemed to be no less than wings.

The time it took for them to disappear-
more brief than time it takes to say "amen";
and so, my master thought it right to leave.
 			 
I followed him. We'd. only walked a little
when roaring water grew so near to us
we hardly could have heard each other speak.
 			 
And even as the river that is first
to take its own course eastward from Mount Viso,
along the left flank of the Apennines
 			 
(which up above is called the Acquacheta,
before it spills into its valley bed
and flows without that name beyond Forlì),
 			 
reverberates above San Benedetto
dell'Alpe as it cascades in one leap,
where there is space enough to house a thousand;
 			 
so did we hear that blackened water roar
as it plunged down a steep and craggy bank,
enough to deafen us in a few hours.
 			 
Around my waist I had a cord as girdle,
and with it once I thought I should be able
to catch the leopard with the painted hide.
 			 
And after I had loosened it completely,
just as my guide commanded me to do,
I handed it to him, knotted and coiled.
 			 
At this, he wheeled around upon his right
and cast it, at some distance from the edge,
straight down into the depth of the ravine.
 			 
"And surely something strange must here reply,"
I said within myself, "to this strange sign-
the sign my master follows with his eye."
 			 
Ah, how much care men ought to exercise
with those whose penetrating intellect
can see our thoughts-not just our outer act!
 			 
He said to me: "Now there will soon emerge
what I await and what your thought has conjured:
it soon must be discovered to your sight."
 			 
Faced with that truth which seems a lie, a man
should always close his lips as long as he can-
to tell it shames him, even though he's blameless;
 			 
but here I can't be still; and by the lines
of this my Comedy, reader, I swear-
and may my verse find favor for long years-
 			 
that through the dense and darkened air I saw
a figure swimming, rising up, enough
to bring amazement to the firmest heart,
 			 
like one returning from the waves where he
went down to loose an anchor snagged upon
a reef or something else hid in the sea,
 			 
who stretches upward and draws in his feet.


## 17

"Behold the beast who bears the pointed tail,
who crosses mountains, shatters weapons, walls!
Behold the one whose stench fills all the world!"
 			 
So did my guide begin to speak to me,
and then he signaled him to come ashore
close to the end of those stone passageways.
 			 
And he came on, that filthy effigy
of fraud, and landed with his head and torso
but did not draw his tail onto the bank.
 			 
The face he wore was that of a just man,
so gracious was his features' outer semblance;
and all his trunk, the body of a serpent;
 			 
he had two paws, with hair up to the armpits;
his back and chest as well as both his flanks
had been adorned with twining knots and circlets.
 			 
No Turks or Tartars ever fashioned fabrics
more colorful in background and relief,
nor had Arachne ever loomed such webs.
 			 
As boats will sometimes lie along the shore,
with part of them on land and part in water,
and just as there, among the guzzling Germans,
 			 
the beaver sets himself when he means war,
so did that squalid beast lie on the margin
of stone that serves as border for the sand.
 			 
And all his tail was quivering in the void
while twisting upward its envenomed fork,
which had a tip just like a scorpion's
 			 
My guide said: "Now we'd better bend our path
a little, till we reach as far as that
malicious beast which crouches over there."
 			 
Thus we descended on the right hand side
and moved ten paces on the stony brink
in order to avoid the sand and fire.
 			 
When we had reached the sprawling beast, I saw-
a little farther on, upon the sand-
some sinners sitting near the fissured rock.
 			 
And here my master said to me: "So that
you may experience this ring in full,
go now, and see the state in which they are.
 			 
But keep your conversation with them brief;
till you return, I'll parley with this beast,
to see if he can lend us his strong shoulders."
 			 
So I went on alone and even farther
along the seventh circle's outer margin,
to where the melancholy people sat.
 			 
Despondency was bursting from their eyes;
this side, then that, their hands kept fending off,
at times the flames, at times the burning soil:
 			 
not otherwise do dogs in summer-now
with muzzle, now with paw when they are bitten
by fleas or gnats or by the sharp gadfly.
 			 
When I had set my eyes upon the faces
of some on whom that painful fire falls,
I recognized no one; but I did notice
 			 
that from the neck of each a purse was hung
that had a special color and an emblem,
and their eyes seemed to feast upon these pouches.
 			 
Looking about-when I had come among them-
I saw a yellow purse with azure on it
that had the face and manner of a lion.
 			 
Then, as I let my eyes move farther on,
I saw another purse that was bloodred,
and it displayed a goose more white than butter.
 			 
And one who had an azure, pregnant sow
inscribed as emblem on his white pouch, said
to me: "What are you doing in this pit?
 			 
Now you be off; and since you're still alive,
remember that my neighbor Vitaliano
shall yet sit here, upon my left hand side.
 			 
Among these Florentines, I'm Paduan;
I often hear them thunder in my ears,
shouting, 'Now let the sovereign cavalier,
 			 
the one who'll bring the purse with three goats, come!'"
At this he slewed his mouth, and then he stuck
his tongue out, like an ox that licks its nose.
 			 
And I, afraid that any longer stay
might anger him who'd warned me to be brief,
made my way back from those exhausted souls.
 			 
I found my guide, who had already climbed
upon the back of that brute animal,
and he told me: "Be strong and daring now,
 			 
for our descent is by this kind of stairs:
you mount in front; I want to be between,
so that the tail can't do you any harm."
 			 
As one who feels the quartan fever near
and shivers, with his nails already blue,
the sight of shade enough to make him shudder,
 			 
so I became when I had heard these words;
but then I felt the threat of shame, which makes
a servant-in his kind lord's presence-brave.
 			 
I settled down on those enormous shoulders;
I wished to say (and yet my voice did not
come as I thought): "See that you hold me tight."
 			 
But he who-other times, in other dangers-
sustained me, just as soon as I had mounted,
clasped me within his arms and propped me up,
 			 
and said: "Now, Geryon, move on; take care
to keep your circles wide, your landing slow;
remember the new weight you're carrying."
 			 
Just like a boat that, starting from its moorings,
moves backward, backward, so that beast took off;
and when he felt himself completely clear,
 			 
he turned his tail to where his chest had been
and, having stretched it, moved it like an eel,
and with his paws he gathered in the air.
 			 
I do not think that there was greater fear
in Phaethon when he let his reins go free-
for which the sky, as one still sees, was scorched-
 			 
nor in poor Icarus when he could feel
his sides unwinged because the wax was melting,
his father shouting to him, "That way's wrong!"
 			 
than was in me when, on all sides, I saw
that I was in the air, and everything
had faded from my sight-except the beast.
 			 
Slowly, slowly, swimming, he moves on;
he wheels and he descends, but I feel only
the wind upon my face and the wind rising.
 			 
Already, on our right, I heard the torrent
resounding, there beneath us, horribly,
so that I stretched my neck and looked below.
 			 
Then I was more afraid of falling off,
for I saw fires and I heard laments,
at which I tremble, crouching, and hold fast.
 			 
And now I saw what I had missed before:
his wheeling and descent-because great torments
were drawing closer to us on all sides.
 			 
Just as a falcon long upon the wing
who, seeing neither lure nor bird, compels
the falconer to cry, "Ah me, you fall!"-
 			 
descends, exhausted, in a hundred circles,
where he had once been swift, and sets himself,
embittered and enraged, far from his master;
 			 
such, at the bottom of the jagged rock,
was Geryon, when he had set us down.
And once our weight was lifted from his back,

he vanished like an arrow from a bow.

## 18

There is a place in Hell called Malebolge,
made all of stone the color of crude iron,
as is the wall that makes its way around it.

Right in the middle of this evil field
is an abyss, a broad and yawning pit,
whose structure I shall tell in its due place.

The belt, then, that extends between the pit
and that hard, steep wall's base is circular;
its bottom has been split into ten valleys.

Just as, where moat on moat surrounds a castle
in order to keep guard upon the walls,
the ground they occupy will form a pattern,

so did the valleys here form a design;
and as such fortresses have bridges running
right from their thresholds toward the outer bank,

so here, across the banks and ditches, ridges
ran from the base of that rock wall until
the pit that cuts them short and joins them all.

This was the place in which we found ourselves
when Geryon had put us down; the poet
held to the left, and I walked at his back.

Upon the right I saw new misery,
I saw new tortures and new torturers,
filling the first of Malebolge's moats.

Along its bottom, naked sinners moved,
to our side of the middle, facing us;
beyond that, they moved with us, but more quickly

as, in the year of Jubilee, the Romans,
confronted by great crowds, contrived a plan
that let the people pass across the bridge,

for to one side went all who had their eyes
upon the Castle, heading toward St. Peter's,
and to the other, those who faced the Mount.

Both left and right, along the somber rock,
I saw horned demons with enormous whips,
who lashed those spirits cruelly from behind.

Ah, how their first strokes made those sinners lift
their heels! Indeed no sinner waited for
a second stroke to fall-or for a third.

And as I moved ahead, my eyes met those
of someone else, and suddenly I said:
"I was not spared the sight of him before."

And so I stayed my steps, to study him;
my gentle guide had stopped together with me
and gave me leave to take a few steps back.

That scourged soul thought that he could hide himself a
by lowering his face; it helped him little,
for I said: "You, who cast your eyes upon

the ground, if these your features are not false,
must be Venedico Caccianemico;
but what brings you to sauces so piquant?"

And he to me: "I speak unwillingly;
but your plain speech, that brings the memory
of the old world to me, is what compels me;

For it was I who led Ghisolabella
to do as the Marquis would have her do-
however they retell that filthy tale.

I'm not the only Bolognese who weeps here;
indeed, this place is so crammed full of us
that not so many tongues have learned to say

sipa between the S&agrave;vena and Reno;
if you want faith and testament of that,
just call to mind our avaricious hearts."

And as he spoke, a demon cudgeled him
with his horsewhip and cried: "Be off, you pimp,
there are no women here for you to trick."

I joined my escort once again; and then
with but few steps, we came upon a place
where, from the bank, a rocky ridge ran out.

We climbed quite easily along that height;
and turning right upon its jagged back,
we took our leave of those eternal circlings.

When we had reached the point where that ridge opens
below to leave a passage for the lashed,
my guide said: "Stay, and make sure that the sight

of still more ill-born spirits strikes your eyes,
for you have not yet seen their faces, since
they have been moving in our own direction."

From the old bridge we looked down at the ranks
of those approaching from the other side;
they too were driven onward by the lash.

And my good master, though I had not asked,
urged me: "Look at that mighty one who comes
and does not seem to shed a tear of pain:

how he still keeps the image of a king!
That shade is Jason, who with heart and head
deprived the men of Colchis of their ram.

He made a landfall on the isle of Lemnos
after its women, bold and pitiless,
had given all their island males to death.

With polished words and love signs he took in
Hypsipyle, the girl whose own deception
had earlier deceived the other women.

And he abandoned her, alone and pregnant;
such guilt condemns him to such punishment;
and for Medea, too, revenge is taken.

With him go those who cheated so: this is
enough for you to know of that first valley
and of the souls it clamps within its jaws."

We were already where the narrow path
reaches and intersects the second bank
and serves as shoulder for another bridge.

We heard the people whine in the next pouch
and heard them as they snorted with their snouts;
we heard them use their palms to beat themselves.

And exhalations, rising from below,
stuck to the banks, encrusting them with mold,
and so waged war against both eyes and nose.

The bottom is so deep, we found no spot
to see it from, except by climbing up
the arch until the bridge's highest point.

This was the place we reached; the ditch beneath
held people plunged in excrement that seemed
as if it had been poured from human privies.

And while my eyes searched that abysmal sight,
I saw one with a head so smeared with shit,
one could not see if he were lay or cleric.

He howled: "Why do you stare more greedily
at me than at the others who are filthy?"
And I: "Because, if I remember right,

I have seen you before, with your hair dry;
and so l eye you more than all: you are
Alessio Interminei of Lucca."

Then he continued, pounding on his pate:
"I am plunged here because of flatteries-
of which my tongue had such sufficiency."

At which my guide advised me: "See you thrust
your head a little farther to the front,
so that your eyes can clearly glimpse the face

of that besmirched, bedraggled harridan
who scratches at herself with shit-filled nails,
and now she crouches, now she stands upright.

That is Tha&iuml;s, the harlot who returned
her lover's question, 'Are you very grateful
to me?' by saying, 'Yes, enormously.'"

And now our sight has-had its fill of this."
 			 

## 19

O Simon Magus! O his sad disciples!
	Rapacious ones, who take the things of God,
that ought to be the brides of Righteousness,
 			 
		and make them fornicate for gold and silver!
		The time has come to let the trumpet sound
	for you; your place is here in this third pouch.
 			 
		We had already reached the tomb beyond
		and climbed onto the ridge, where its high point
		hangs just above the middle of the ditch.
 			 
		O Highest Wisdom, how much art you show
	in heaven, earth, and this sad world below,
	how just your power is when it allots!
 			 
		Along the sides and down along the bottom,
I saw that livid rock was perforated:
		the openings were all one width and round.
 			 
		They did not seem to me less broad or more
			than those that in my handsome San Giovanni
	were made to serve as basins for baptizing;
 			 
		and one of these, not many years ago,
I broke for someone who was drowning in it:
and let this be my seal to set men straight.
 			 
	Out from the mouth of each hole there emerged
a sinner's feet and so much of his legs
	up to the thigh; the rest remained within.
 			 
		Both soles of every sinner were on fire;
their joints were writhing with such violence,
they would have severed withes and ropes of grass.
 			 
		As flame on oily things will only stir
			along the outer surface, so there, too,
			that fire made its way from heels to toes.
			 
		"Master," I said, "who is that shade who suffers
	and quivers more than all his other comrades,
		that sinner who is licked by redder flames?"
			 
And he to me: "If you would have me lead
you down along the steepest of the banks,
from him you'll learn about his self and sins."
			 
And I: "What pleases you will please me too:
	you are my lord; you know I do not swerve
	from what you will, you know what is unspoken."
			 
		At this we came upon the fourth embankment;
we turned and, keeping to the left, descended
into the narrow, perforated bottom.
			 
		My good lord did not let me leave his side
until he'd brought me to the hole that held
that sinner who lamented with his legs.
			 
"Whoever you may be, dejected soul,
whose head is downward, planted like a pole,"
	my words began, "do speak if you are able."
 			 
		I stood as does the friar who confesses
	the foul assassin who, fixed fast, head down,
calls back the friar, and so delays his death;

		and he cried out: "Are you already standing,
		already standing there, o Boniface?
The book has lied to me by several years.

		Are you so quickly sated with the riches
	for which you did not fear to take by guile
	the Lovely Lady, then to violate her?"

And I became like those who stand as if
	they have been mocked, who cannot understand
what has been said to them and can't respond.

		But Virgil said: "Tell this to him at once:
	'I am not he-not whom you think I am.'"
			And I replied as I was told to do.

At this the spirit twisted both his feet,
and sighing and with a despairing voice,
he said: "What is it, then, you want of me?

		If you have crossed the bank and climbed so far
 find out who I am, then know that I
			was one of those who wore the mighty mantle,

	and surely was a son of the she-bear,
	so eager to advance the cubs that I
			pursed wealth above while here I purse myself.

Below my head there is the place of those
	who took the way of simony before me;
			and they are stuffed within the clefts of stone.

		I, too, shall yield my place and fall below
	when he arrives, the one for whom I had
			mistaken you when I was quick to question.

	But I have baked my feet a longer time,
		have stood like this, upon my head, than he
		is to stand planted here with scarlet feet:

for after him, one uglier in deeds
		will come, a lawless shepherd from the west,
	worthy to cover him and cover me.

	He'll be a second Jason, of whom we read
	in Maccabees; and just as Jason's king
		was soft to him, so shall the king of France

	be soft to this one." And I do not know
	if I was too rash here-I answered so:
			"Then tell me now, how much gold did our Lord

		ask that Saint Peter give to him before
		he placed the keys within his care? Surely
		the only thing he said was: 'Follow me.'
 			 
		And Peter and the others never asked
	for gold or silver when they chose Matthias
			to take the place of the transgressing soul.
 			 
		Stay as you are, for you are rightly punished;
and guard with care the money got by evil
	that made you so audacious against Charles.
 			 
		And were it not that I am still prevented
	by reverence for those exalted keys
		that you had held within the happy life,
 			 
	I'd utter words much heavier than these,
	because your avarice afflicts the world:
it tramples on the good, lifts up the wicked.
 			 
	You, shepherds, the Evangelist had noticed
when he saw her who sits upon the waters
and realized she fornicates with kings,
 			 
	she who was born with seven heads and had
	the power and support of the ten horns,
		as long as virtue was her husband's pleasure.
 			 
		You've made yourselves a god of gold and silver;
	how are you different from idolaters,
			save that they worship one and you a hundred?
 			 
		Ah, Constantine, what wickedness was born-
and not from your conversion-from the dower
that you bestowed upon the first rich father!"
 			 
And while I sang such notes to him-whether
		it was his indignation or his conscience
			that bit him-he kicked hard with both his soles.
 			 
		I do indeed believe it pleased my guide:
			he listened always with such satisfied
		expression to the sound of those true words.
 			 
	And then he gathered me in both his arms
	and, when he had me fast against his chest,
		where he climbed down before, climbed upward now;
 			 
		nor did he tire of clasping me until
			he brought me to the summit of the arch
		that crosses from the fourth to the fifth rampart.
 			 
	And here he gently set his burden down-
 		gently because the ridge was rough and steep,
		and would have been a rugged pass for goats.
 			 
	From there another valley lay before me.
 			 
## 20

I must make verses of new punishment
and offer matter now for Canto Twenty
	of this first canticle-of the submerged.
 			 
		I was already well prepared to stare
		below, into the depth that was disclosed,
			where tears of anguished sorrow bathed the ground;
 
	and in the valley's circle I saw souls
		advancing, mute and weeping, at the pace
		that, in our world, holy processions take.
 
	As I inclined my head still more, I saw
		that each, amazingly, appeared contorted
			between the chin and where the chest begins;
 			 
 		they had their faces twisted toward their haunches
			and found it necessary to walk backward,
			because they could not see ahead of them.
 			 
		Perhaps the force of palsy has so fully
	distorted some, but that I've yet to see,
		and I do not believe that that can be.
 			 
		May God so let you, reader, gather fruit
from what you read; and now think for yourself
how I could ever keep my own face dry
 			 
	when I beheld our image so nearby
	and so awry that tears, down from the eyes,
bathed the buttocks, running down the cleft.
 			 
 		Of course I wept, leaning against a rock
		along that rugged ridge, so that my guide
 			told me: "Are you as foolish as the rest?
 			 
 		Here pity only lives when it is dead:
for who can be more impious than he
		who links God's judgment to passivity?
 			 
		Lift, lift your head and see the one for whom
	the earth was opened while the Thebans watched,
so that they all cried: 'Amphiaraus,
 			 
		where are you rushing? Have you quit the fight?'
or did he interrupt his downward plunge
to Minos, who lays hands on every sinner.
 			 
		See how he's made a chest out of his shoulders;
and since he wanted so to see ahead,
he looks behind and walks a backward path.
 			 
And see Tiresias, who changed his mien
when from a man he turned into a woman,
so totally transforming all his limbs
 			 
		that then he had to strike once more upon
	the two entwining serpents with his wand
before he had his manly plumes again.
 			 
	And Aruns is the one who backs against
the belly of Tiresias-Aruns who,
	in Luni's hills, tilled by the Carrarese,
 			 
		who live below, had as his home, a cave
	among white marbles, from which he could gaze
at stars and sea with unimpeded view.
 			 
		And she who covers up her breasts-which you
	can't see with her disheveled locks, who keeps
			all of her hairy parts to the far side,
 			 
		was Manto, who had searched through many lands,
			then settled in the place where I was born;
			on this, I'd have you hear me now a while.
 			 
		When Manto's father took his leave of life,
		and Bacchus' city found itself enslaved,
			she wandered through the world for many years.
 			 
		High up, in lovely Italy, beneath
	the Alps that shut in Germany above
	Tirolo, lies a lake known as Benaco.
 			 
	A thousand springs and more, I think, must flow
out of the waters of that lake to bathe
Pennino, Garda, Val Camonica.
 			 
		And at its middle is a place where three-
	the bishops of Verona, Brescia, Trento
	may bless if they should chance to come that way.
 			 
		Peschiera, strong and handsome fortress, built
 Bergamaschi,			to face the Brescians and the Bergamasques
scese.			stands where the circling shore is at its lowest.
 			 
to caschi	20.73		There, all the waters that cannot be held
 star non può,			within the bosom of Benaco fall,
i paschi.			to form a river running through green meadows.
 			 
 mette co,	20.76		No sooner has that stream begun to flow
si chiama			than it is called the Mincio, not Benaco-
 in Po.			until Govèrnolo, where it joins the Po.
 			 
trova una lama,	20.79		It's not flowed far before it finds flat land;
a 'mpaluda;			and there it stretches out to form a fen
r grama.			that in the summer can at times be fetid.
 			 
 cruda	20.82		And when she passed that way, the savage virgin
pantano,			saw land along the middle of the swamp,
 nuda.			untilled and stripped of its inhabitants.
 			 
rzio umano,	20.85		And there, to flee all human intercourse,
far sue arti,			she halted with her slaves to ply her arts;
orpo vano.			and there she lived, there left her empty body.
 			 
And afterward, the people of those parts
		collected at that place, because the marsh-
		surrounding it on all sides-made it strong.
 			 
		They built a city over her dead bones;
	and after her who first had picked that spot,
	they called it Mantua-they cast no lots.
 			 
		There once were far more people in its walls,
before the foolishness of Casalodi
was tricked by the deceit of Pinamonte.
 			 
	Therefore, I charge you, if you ever hear
a different tale of my town's origin,
do not let any falsehood gull the truth."
 			 
		And I: "O master, that which you have spoken
	convinces me and so compels my trust
	that others' words would only be spent coals.
 			 
		But tell me if among the passing souls
you see some spirits worthy of our notice,
because my mind is bent on that alone."
 			 
		Then he to me: "That shade who spreads his beard
down from his cheeks across his swarthy shoulders
	when Greece had been so emptied of its males
 			 
		that hardly any cradle held a son,
he was an augur; and at Aulis, he
and Calchas set the time to cut the cables.
 			 
		His name's Eurypylus; a certain passage
of my high tragedy has sung it so;
	you know that well enough, who know the whole.
 			 
	That other there, his flanks extremely spare,
	was Michael Scot, a man who certainly
	knew how the game of magic fraud was played.
 			 
	See there Guido Bonatti; see Asdente,
	who now would wish he had attended to
his cord and leather, but repents too late.
 			 
		See those sad women who had left their needle,
		shuttle, and spindle to become diviners;
they cast their spells with herbs and effigies
 			 
	But let us go; Cain with his thorns already
	is at the border of both hemispheres
and there, below Seville, touches the sea.
 			 
Last night the moon was at its full; you should
		be well aware of this, for there were times
when it did you no harm in the deep wood."
 			 
		These were his words to me; meanwhile we journeyed.

## 21

We came along from one bridge to another,
	talking of things my Comedy is not
		concerned to sing. We held fast to the summit,
 			 
		then stayed our steps to spy the other cleft
		of Malebolge and other vain laments.
I saw that it was wonderfully dark.
 			 
		As in the arsenal of the Venetians,
all winter long a stew of sticky pitch
	boils up to patch their sick and tattered ships
 			 
	that cannot sail (instead of voyaging,
		some build new keels, some tow and tar the ribs
		of hulls worn out by too much journeying;
 			 
	some hammer at the prow, some at the stern,
	and some make oars, and some braid ropes and cords;
		one mends the jib, another, the mainsail);
 			 
	so, not by fire but by the art of God,
	below there boiled a thick and tarry mass
	that covered all the banks with clamminess.
 			 
		I saw it, but l could not see within it;
		no thing was visible but boiling bubbles,
		the swelling of the pitch; and then it settled.
 			 
		And while I watched below attentively,
		my guide called out to me: "Take care! Take care!"
		And then, from where I stood, he drew me near.
 			 
		I turned around as one who is impatient
		to see what he should shun but is dashed down
beneath the terror he has undergone,
 			 
		who does not stop his flight and yet would look.
	And then in back of us I saw a black
	demon as he came racing up the crags.
 			 
		Ah, he was surely barbarous to see!
	And how relentless seemed to me his acts!
His wings were open and his feet were lithe;
 			 
	across his shoulder, which was sharp and high,
he had slung a sinner, upward from the thighs;
in front, the demon gripped him by the ankles.
 			 
	Then from our bridge, he called: "O Malebranche,
I've got an elder of Saint Zita for you!
Shove this one under I'll go back for more-
 			 
	his city is well furnished with such stores;
	there, everyone's a grafter but Bonturo;
and there-for cash-they'll change a no to yes."
 			 
	He threw the sinner down, then wheeled along
The stony cliff: no mastiff's ever been
		unleashed with so much haste to chase a thief.
 			 
		The sinner plunged, then surfaced, black with pitch:
			but now the demons, from beneath the bridge,
			shouted: "the Sacred Face has no place here;
 			 
		here we swim differently than in the Serchio;
		if you don't want to feel our grappling hooks,
	don't try to lift yourself above that ditch."
 			 
		They pricked him with a hundred prongs and more,
		then taunted: "Here one dances under cover,
		so try to grab your secret graft below."
 			 
		The demons did the same as any cook
	who has his urchins force the meat with hooks
			deep down into the pot, that it not float.
 			 
		Then my good master said to me: "Don't let
	those demons see that you are here; take care
	to crouch behind the cover of a crag.
 			 
		No matter what offense they offer me,
		don't be afraid; I know how these things go-
I've had to face such fracases before."
 			 
	When this was said, he moved beyond the bridgehead.
And on the sixth embankment, he had need
	to show his imperturbability.
 			 
With the same frenzy, with the brouhaha
		of dogs, when they beset a poor wretch who
	then stops dead in his tracks as if to beg,
 			 
		so, from beneath the bridge, the demons rushed
against my guide with all their prongs, but he
called out: "Can't you forget your savagery!
 			 
		Before you try to maul me, just let one
of all your troop step forward. Hear me out,
and then decide if I am to be hooked."
 			 
At this they howled, "Let Malacoda go!"
			And one of them moved up-the others stayed-
	and as he came, he asked: "How can he win?"
 			 
	"O Malacoda, do you think I've come,"
	my master answered him, "already armed-
	as you can see -against your obstacles,
 			 
	without the will of God and helpful fate?
	Let us move on; it is the will of Heaven
			for me to show this wild way to another."
 			 
		At this the pride of Malacoda fell;
			his prong dropped to his feet. He told his fellows:
			"Since that's the way things stand, let us not wound him."
 			 
		My guide then spoke to me: "O you, who crouch,
			bent low among the bridge's splintered rocks,
you can feel safe-and now return to me."
 			 
	At this I moved and quickly came to him.
The devils had edged forward, all of them;
	I feared that they might fail to keep their word:
 			 
		just so, I saw the infantry when they
			marched out, under safe conduct, from Caprona;
		they trembled when they passed their enemies.

		My body huddled closer to my guide;
			I did not let the demons out of sight;
	the looks they cast at us were less than kind.

 		They bent their hooks and shouted to each other:
 			"And shall I give it to him on the rump?"
 And all of them replied, "Yes, let him have it!"

		But Malacoda, still in conversation
with my good guide, turned quickly to his squadron
	and said: "Be still, Scarmiglione, still!"

		To us he said: "There is no use in going
	much farther on this ridge, because the sixth
		bridge-at the bottom-there is smashed to bits.

		Yet if you two still want to go ahead,
			move up and walk along this rocky edge;
			nearby, another ridge will form a path.

		Five hours from this hour yesterday, one
	thousand and two hundred sixty-six
			years passed since that roadway was shattered here.

		I'm sending ten of mine out there to see
			if any sinner lifts his head for air;
		go with my men there is no malice in them."
 			 
	"Step forward, Alichino and Calcabrina,"
			he then began to say, "and you, Cagnazzo;
	and Barbariccia, who can lead the ten.
 			 
	Let Libicocco go, and Draghignazzo
	and tusky Ciriatto and Graffiacane
	and Farfarello and mad Rubicante.
 			 
	Search all around the clammy stew of pitch;
			keep these two safe and sound till the next ridge
that rises without break across the dens."
 			 
		"Ah me! What is this, master, that I see?"
			I said. "Can't we do without company?
		If you know how to go, I want no escort.
 			 
If you are just as keen as usual,
			can't you see how those demons grind their teeth?
		Their brows are menacing, they promise trouble."
 			 
		And he to me: "I do not want you frightened:
		just let them gnash away as they may wish;
they do it for the wretches boiled in pitch."
 			 
They turned around along the left hand bank:
but first each pressed his tongue between his teeth
as signal for their leader, Barbariccia.
 			 
		And he had made a trumpet of his ass.

## 22

Before this I've seen horsemen start to march
	and open the assault and muster ranks
and seen them, too, at times beat their retreat;
 			 
	and on your land, o Aretines, I've seen
rangers and raiding parties galloping,
	the clash of tournaments, the rush of jousts,
 			 
			now done with trumpets, now with bells, and now
		with drums, and now with signs from castle walls,
	with native things and with imported ware;
 			 
		but never yet have I seen horsemen or
seen infantry or ship that sails by signal
		of land or star move to so strange a bugle!
 			 
		We made our way together with ten demons:
		ah, what ferocious company! And yet
		"in church with saints, with rotters in the tavern."
 			 
		But I was all intent upon the pitch,
		to seek out every feature of the pouch
		and of the people who were burning in it.
 			 
		Just as the dolphins do, when with arched back,
	they signal to the seamen to prepare
		for tempest, that their vessel may be spared,
 			 
		so here from time to time, to ease his torment,
		some sinner showed his back above the surface,
	then hid more quickly than a lightning flash.
 			 
And just as on the margin of a ditch,
		frogs crouch, their snouts alone above the water,
		so as to hide their feet and their plump flesh,
 			 
		so here on every side these sinners crouched;
	but faster than a flash, when Barbariccia
	drew near, they plunged beneath the boiling pitch.
 			 
		I saw-my heart still shudders in recall-
		one who delayed, just as at times a frog
		is left behind while others dive below;
 			 
	and Graffiacane, who was closest to him,
	then hooked him by his pitch entangled locks
		and hauled him up; he seemed to me an otter.
 			 
	By now I knew the names of all those demons-
	I'd paid attention when the fiends were chosen;
		I'd watched as they stepped forward one by one.
 			 
		"O Rubicante, see you set your talons
			right into him, so you can flay his flesh!"
	So did those cursed ones cry out together.
 			 
	And I: "My master, if you can, find out
 is the name of that unfortunate
who's fallen victim to his enemies."
 
My guide, who then drew near that sinner's side,
	asked him to tell his birthplace. He replied:
homeland was the kingdom of Navarre.
 
		My mother, who had had me by a wastrel,
			destroyer of himself and his possessions,
			had placed me in the service of a lord.
 
		Then I was in the household of the worthy
			King Thibault; there I started taking graft;
	with this heat I pay reckoning for that."
 
And Ciriatto, from whose mouth there bulged
to right and left two tusks like a wild hog's,
hen let him feel how one of them could mangle.
 
		The mouse had fallen in with evil cats;
 	but Barbariccia clasped him in his arms
			and said: "Stand off there, while I fork him fast."
 
And turning toward my master then, he said:
	"Ask on, if you would learn some more from him
 		before one of the others does him in."
 
		At which my guide: "Now tell: among the sinners
			who hide beneath the pitch, are any others
		Italian?" And he: "I have just left
 
	one who was nearby there; and would I were
	still covered by the pitch as he is hidden,
	for then I'd have no fear of hook or talon."
 			 
And Libicocco said, "We've been too patient!"
and, with his grapple, grabbed him by the arm
and, ripping, carried off a hunk of flesh.
 
	But Draghignazzo also looked as if
to grab his legs; at which, their captain wheeled
	and threatened all of them with raging looks.
 
	When they'd grown somewhat less tumultuous,
		without delay my guide asked of that one
		who had his eyes still fixed upon his wound:
 
		"Who was the one you left to come ashore-
			unluckily-as you just said before?"
		He answered: "Fra Gomita of Gallura,
 
		who was a vessel fit for every fraud;
he had his master's enemies in hand,
but handled them in ways that pleased them all.
 
		He took their gold and smoothly let them off,
		as he himself says; and in other matters,
he was a sovereign, not a petty, swindler.
 
His comrade there is Don Michele Zanche
			of Logodoro; and their tongues are never
	too tired to talk of their Sardinia.
 
	Ah me, see that one there who grinds his teeth!
If I were not afraid, I'd speak some more,
		but he is getting set to scratch my scurf."
 
 		And their great marshal, facing Farfarello-
 who was so hot to strike he rolled his eyes,
		said: "Get away from there, you filthy bird!"
 
	"If you perhaps would like to see or hear,"
that sinner, terrified, began again,
	"Lombards or Tuscans, I can fetch you some;
 
but let the Malebranche stand aside
		so that my comrades need not fear their vengeance.
		Remaining in this very spot, I shall,
 
	although alone, make seven more appear
		when I have whistled, as has been our custom
when one of us has managed to get out."
 			 
	At that, Cagnazzo lifted up his snout
	and shook his head, and said: "Just listen to
that trick by which he thinks he can dive back!"
 			 
		To this, he who was rich in artifice
replied: "Then I must have too many tricks,
			if I bring greater torment to my friends."
 			 
	This was too much for Alichino and,
		despite the others, he cried out: "If you
dive back, I shall not gallop after you
 			 
		but beat my wings above the pitch; we'll leave
			this height; with the embankment as a screen,
	we'll see if you-alone-can handle us."
 			 
		O you who read, hear now of this new sport:
			each turned his eyes upon the other shore,
			he first who'd been most hesitant before.
 			 
		The Navarrese, in nick of time, had planted
			his feet upon the ground; then in an instant
		he jumped and freed himself from their commander.
 			 
	At this each demon felt the prick of guilt,
and most, he who had led his band to blunder;
so he took off and shouted: "You are caught!"
 			 
	But this could help him little; wings were not
more fast than fear; the sinner plunged right under;
the other, flying up, lifted his chest:
 			 
not otherwise the wild duck when it plunges
	precipitously, when the falcon nears
then-exhausted, thwarted-flies back up.
 			 
		But Calcabrina, raging at the trick,
	flew after Alichino; he was keen
		to see the sinner free and have a brawl;
 			 
and once the Navarrese had disappeared,
			he turned his talons on his fellow demon
		and tangled with him just above the ditch.
 			 
		But Alichino clawed him well-he was
indeed a full-grown kestrel; and both fell
			into the middle of the boiling pond.
 			 
		The heat was quick to disentangle them,
but still there was no way they could get out;
their wings were stuck, enmeshed in glue-like pitch.
 			 
			And Barbariccia, grieving with the rest,
		sent four to fly out toward the other shore
			with all their forks, and speedily enough
 			 
		on this side and on that they took their posts;
		and toward those two-stuck fast, already cooked
			beneath that crust-they stretched their grappling hooks.
 			 
		We left them still contending with that mess.


## 23

Silent, alone, no one escorting us,
			we made our way-one went before, one after-
			as Friars Minor when they walk together.
 			 
	The present fracas made me think of Aesop-
	that fable where he tells about the mouse
	and frog; for "near" and "nigh" are not more close
 			 
		than are that fable and this incident,
		if you compare with care how each begins
	and then compare the endings that they share.
 			 
		And even as one thought springs from another,
so out of that was still another born,
which made the fear I felt before redouble.
 			 
	I thought: "Because of us, they have been mocked,
	and this inflicted so much hurt and scorn
	that I am sure they feel deep indignation.
 			 
		If anger's to be added to their malice,
they'll hunt us down with more ferocity
	than any hound whose teeth have trapped a hare."
 			 
I could already feel my hair curl up
	from fear, and I looked back attentively,
	while saying: "Master, if you don't conceal
 			 
	yourself and me at once-they terrify me,
		those Malebranche; they are after us;
	I so imagine them, I hear them now."
 			 
And he to me: "Were I a leaded mirror,
I could not gather in your outer image
		more quickly than I have received your inner.
 			 
	For even now your thoughts have joined my own;
	in both our acts and aspects we are kin-
	with both our minds I've come to one decision.
 			 
	If that right bank is not extremely steep,
		we can descend into the other moat
and so escape from the imagined chase."
 			 
	He'd hardly finished telling me his plan
when I saw them approach with outstretched wings,
	not too far off, and keen on taking us.
 			 
My guide snatched me up instantly, just as
the mother who is wakened by a roar
	and catches sight of blazing flames beside her,
 			 
	will lift her son and run without a stop-
	she cares more for the child than for herself-
	not pausing even to throw on a shift;
 			 
	and down the hard embankment's edge-his back
		lay flat along the sloping rock that closes
			one side of the adjacent moat-he slid.
 			 
	No water ever ran so fast along
	a sluice to turn the wheels of a land mill,
			not even when its flow approached the paddles,
 			 
	as did my master race down that embankment
	while bearing me with him upon his chest,
	just like a son, and not like a companion.
 			 
	His feet had scarcely reached the bed that lies
along the deep below, than those ten demons
		were on the edge above us; but there was
 			 
		nothing to fear; for that High Providence
	that willed them ministers of the fifth ditch,
		denies to all of them the power to leave it.
 			 
		Below that point we found a painted people,
		who moved about with lagging steps, in circles,
			weeping, with features tired and defeated.
 			 
		And they were dressed in cloaks with cowls so low
		they fell before their eyes, of that same cut
	that's used to make the clothes for Cluny's monks.
 			 
		Outside, these cloaks were gilded and they dazzled;
		but inside they were all of lead, so heavy
	that Frederick's capes were straw compared to them.
 			 
	A tiring mantle for eternity!
		We turned again, as always, to the left,
			along with them, intent on their sad weeping;
 			 
		but with their weights that weary people paced
	so slowly that we found ourselves among
	new company each time we took a step.
 			 
		At which I told my guide: "Please try to find
someone whose name or deed I recognize;
and while we walk, be watchful with your eyes."
 			 
And one who'd taken in my Tuscan speech
cried out behind us: "Stay your steps, o you
who hurry so along this darkened air!
 			 
	Perhaps you'll have from me that which you seek."
	At which my guide turned to me, saying: "Wait,
and then continue, following his pace."
 			 
	I stopped, and I saw two whose faces showed
their minds were keen to be with me; but both
	their load and the tight path forced them to slow.
 			 
		When they came up, they looked askance at me
			a long while, and they uttered not a word
until they turned to one another, saying:
 			 
	"The throbbing of his throat makes this one seem
		alive; and if they're dead, what privilege lets
	them appear without the heavy mantle?"
 			 
	Then they addressed me: "Tuscan, you who come
	to this assembly of sad hypocrites,
			do not disdain to tell us who you are."
 			 
	I answered: "Where the lovely Arno flows,
			there I was born and raised, in the great city;
		I'm with the body I have always had.
 			 
	But who are you, upon whose cheeks I see
			such tears distilled by grief? And let me know
		what punishment it is that glitters so."
 			 
	And one of them replied: "The yellow cloaks
		are of a lead so thick, their heaviness
	makes us, the balances beneath them, creak.
 			 
We both were Jovial Friars, and Bolognese;
my name was Catalano, Loderingo
		was his, and we were chosen by your city
 			 
		together, for the post that's usually
		one man's, to keep the peace; and what we were
		is still to be observed around Gardingo."
 			 
		I then began, "O Friars, your misdeeds . . . "
			but said no more, because my eyes had caught
		one crucified by three stakes on the ground.
 			 
		When he saw me, that sinner writhed all over,
and he breathed hard into his beard with sighs;
	observing that, Fra Catalano said
 			 
	to me: "That one impaled there, whom you see,
counseled the Pharisees that it was prudent
	to let one man-and not one nation-suffer.
 			 
		Naked, he has been stretched across the path,
	as you can see, and he must feel the weight
of anyone who passes over him.
 			 
		Like torment, in this ditch, afflicts both his
		father-in-law and others in that council,
which for the Jews has seeded so much evil."
 			 
		Then I saw Virgil stand amazed above
that one who lay stretched out upon a cross
	so squalidly in his eternal exile.
 			 
		And he addressed the friar in this way:
	"If it does not displease you-if you may-
tell us if there's some passage on the right
 			 
that would allow the two of us to leave
without our having to compel black angels
	to travel to this deep, to get us out."
 			 
		He answered: "Closer than you hope, you'll find
		a rocky ridge that stretches from the great
	round wall and crosses all the savage valleys,
 			 
		except that here it's broken-not a bridge.
			But where its ruins slope along the bank
			and heap up at the bottom, you can climb."
 			 
		My leader stood a while with his head bent,
then said: "He who hooks sinners over there
	gave us a false account of this affair."
 			 
		At which the Friar: "In Bologna, I
	once heard about the devil's many vices-
		they said he was a liar and father of lies."
 			 
		And then my guide moved on with giant strides,
	somewhat disturbed, with anger in his eyes;
at this I left those overburdened spirits,
 			 
		while following the prints of his dear feet.


## 24

In that part of the young year when the sun
		begins to warm its locks beneath Aquarius
	and nights grow shorter, equaling the days,
 			 
		when hoarfrost mimes the image of his white
sister upon the ground-but not for long,
because the pen he uses is not sharp-
 			 
	the farmer who is short of fodder rises
	and looks and sees the fields all white, at which
			he slaps his thigh, turns back into the house,
 			 
		and here and there complains like some poor wretch
	who doesn't know what can be done, and then
	goes out again and gathers up new hope
 			 
		on seeing that the world has changed its face
	in so few hours, and he takes his staff
	and hurries out his flock of sheep to pasture.
 			 
	So did my master fill me with dismay
	when I saw how his brow was deeply troubled,
		yet then the plaster soothed the sore as quickly:
 			 
		for soon as we were on the broken bridge,
	my guide turned back to me with that sweet manner
	I first had seen along the mountain's base.
 			 
		And he examined carefully the ruin;
then having picked the way we would ascend,
	he opened up his arms and thrust me forward.
 			 
		And just as he who ponders as he labors,
			who's always ready for the step ahead,
	so, as he lifted me up toward the summit
 			 
		of one great crag, he'd see another spur,
		saying: "That is the one you will grip next,
			but try it first to see if it is firm."
 			 
		That was no path for those with cloaks of lead,
		for he and I-he, light; I, with support-
		could hardly make it up from spur to spur.
 			 
		And were it not that, down from this enclosure,
		the slope was shorter than the bank before,
		I cannot speak for him, but I should surely
 			 
		have been defeated. But since Malebolge
			runs right into the mouth of its last well,
		the placement of each valley means it must
 			 
		have one bank high and have the other short;
	and so we reached, at length, the jutting where
the last stone of the ruined bridge breaks off.
 			 
	The breath within my lungs was so exhausted
			from climbing, I could not go on; in fact,
as soon as I had reached that stone, I sat.
 			 
		"Now you must cast aside your laziness,"
		my master said, "for he who rests on down
	or under covers cannot come to fame;
 			 
	and he who spends his life without renown
	leaves such a vestige of himself on earth
		as smoke bequeaths to air or foam to water.
 			 
	Therefore, get up; defeat your breathlessness
	with spirit that can win all battles if
	the body's heaviness does not deter it.
 			 
		A longer ladder still is to be climbed;
it's not enough to have left them behind;
		if you have understood, now profit from it."
 			 
	Then I arose and showed myself far better
equipped with breath than I had been before:
		"Go on, for I am strong and confident."
 			 
	We took our upward way upon the ridge,
	with crags more jagged, narrow, difficult,
and much more steep than we had crossed before.
 			 
		I spoke as we went on, not to seem weak;
at this, a voice came from the ditch beyond-
		a voice that was not suited to form words.
 			 
		I know not what he said, although I was
	already at the summit of the bridge
that crosses there; and yet he seemed to move.
 			 
		I had bent downward, but my living eyes
	could not see to the bottom through that dark;
	at which I said: "O master, can we reach
 			 
		the other belt? Let us descend the wall,
	for as I hear and cannot understand,
so I see down but can distinguish nothing."
 			 
	"The only answer that I give to you
	is doing it," he said. "A just request
is to be met in silence, by the act."
 			 
		We then climbed down the bridge, just at the end
where it runs right into the eighth embankment,
			and now the moat was plain enough to me;
 			 
	and there within I saw a dreadful swarm
of serpents so extravagant in form-
		remembering them still drains my blood from me.
 			 
	Let Libya boast no more about her sands;
		for if she breeds chelydri, jaculi,
cenchres with amphisbaena, pareae,
 			 
she never showed-with all of Ethiopia
or all the land that borders the Red Sea-
		so many, such malignant, pestilences.
 			 
	Among this cruel and depressing swarm,
			ran people who were naked, terrified,
with no hope of a hole or heliotrope.
 			 
	Their hands were tied behind by serpents; these
had thrust their head and tail right through the loins,
	and then were knotted on the other side.
 			 
	And-there!-a serpent sprang with force at one
	who stood upon our shore, transfixing him
	just where the neck and shoulders form a knot.
 			 
		No o or i has ever been transcribed
	so quickly as that soul caught fire and burned
			and, as he fell, completely turned to ashes;
 			 
		and when he lay, undone, upon the ground,
the dust of him collected by itself
and instantly returned to what it was:
 			 
		just so, it is asserted by great sages,
that, when it reaches its five-hundredth year,
		the phoenix dies and then is born again;
 			 
		lifelong it never feeds on grass or grain,
only on drops of incense and amomum;
its final winding sheets are nard and myrrh.
 			 
		And just as he who falls, and knows not how-
	by demon's force that drags him to the ground
	or by some other hindrance that binds man-
 			 
		who, when he rises, stares about him, all
	bewildered by the heavy anguish he
		has suffered, sighing as he looks around;
 			 
		so did this sinner stare when he arose.
Oh, how severe it is, the power of God
	that, as its vengeance, showers down such blows!
 			 
		My guide then asked that sinner who he was;
			to this he answered: "Not long since, I rained
	from Tuscany into this savage maw.
 			 
Mule that I was, the bestial life pleased me
		and not the human; I am Vanni Fucci,
		beast; and the den that suited me-Pistoia."
 			 
		And I to Virgil: "Tell him not to slip
		away, and ask what sin has thrust him here;
			I knew him as a man of blood and anger."
 			 
		The sinner heard and did not try to feign
		but turned his mind and face, intent, toward me;
	and coloring with miserable shame,
 			 
		he said: "I suffer more because you've caught me
in this, the misery you see, than I
		suffered when taken from the other life.
 			 
		I can't refuse to answer what you ask:
	I am set down so far because I robbed
		the sacristy of its fair ornaments,
 			 
		and someone else was falsely blamed for that.
	But lest this sight give you too much delight,
		if you can ever leave these lands of darkness,
 			 
		open your ears to my announcement, hear:
		Pistoia first will strip herself of Blacks,
	then Florence will renew her men and manners.
 			 
From Val di Magra, Mars will draw a vapor
	which turbid clouds will try to wrap; the clash
between them will be fierce, impetuous,
 			 
a tempest, fought upon Campo Piceno,
	until that vapor, vigorous, shall crack
	the mist, and every White be struck by it.
 			 
		And I have told you this to make you grieve."


## 25

When he had finished with his words, the thief
			raised high his fists with both figs cocked and cried:
		"Take that, o God; I square them off for you!"
 
		From that time on, those serpents were my friends,
	for one of them coiled then around his neck,
			as if to say, "I'll have you speak no more";
 
		another wound about his arms and bound him
			again and wrapped itself in front so firmly,
			he could not even make them budge an inch.
 
		Pistoia, ah, Pistoia, must you last:
	why not decree your self-incineration,
 		since you surpass your seed in wickedness?
 
		Throughout the shadowed circles of deep Hell,
		I saw no soul against God so rebel,
	not even he who fell from Theban walls.
 
	He fled and could not say another word;
and then I saw a Centaur full of anger,
	shouting: "Where is he, where's that bitter one?"
 
		I do not think Maremma has the number
	of snakes that Centaur carried on his haunch
			until the part that takes our human form.
 
	Upon his shoulders and behind his nape
there lay a dragon with its wings outstretched;
it sets ablaze all those it intercepts.
 
		My master said: "That Centaur there is Cacus,
	who often made a lake of blood within
			a grotto underneath Mount Aventine.
 
		He does not ride the same road as his brothers
			because he stole-and most deceitfully-
 	from the great herd nearby; his crooked deeds
 
ended beneath the club of Hercules,
	who may have given him a hundred blows-
		but he was not alive to feel the tenth."
 
	While he was talking so, Cacus ran by
			and, just beneath our ledge, three souls arrived;
			but neither I nor my guide noticed them
 			 
		until they had cried out: "And who are you?"
		At this the words we shared were interrupted,
			and we attended only to those spirits.
 			 
		I did not recognize them, but it happened,
as chance will usually bring about,
that one of them called out the other's name,
 			 
		exclaiming: "Where was Cianfa left behind?"
			At this, so that my guide might be alert,
	I raised my finger up from chin to nose.
 			 
	If, reader, you are slow now to believe
			what I shall tell, that is no cause for wonder
		for I who saw it hardly can accept it.
 			 
		As I kept my eyes fixed upon those sinners,
a serpent with six feet springs out against
		one of the three, and clutches him completely.
 			 
		It gripped his belly with its middle feet,
and with its forefeet grappled his two arms;
		and then it sank its teeth in both his cheeks;
 			 
		it stretched its rear feet out along his thighs
			and ran its tail along between the two,
	then straightened it again behind his loins.
 			 
		No ivy ever gripped a tree so fast
	as when that horrifying monster clasped
			and intertwined the other's limbs with its.
 			 
		Then just as if their substance were warm wax,
			they stuck together and they mixed their colors,
 		so neither seemed what he had been before;
 			 
		just as, when paper's kindled, where it still
 has not caught flame in full, its color's dark
	though not yet black, while white is dying off.
 			 
	The other two souls stared, and each one cried:
		"Ah me, Agnello, how you change! Just see,
			you are already neither two nor one"
 			 
	Then two heads were already joined in one,
 	when in one face where two had been dissolved,
			two intermingled shapes appeared to us.
 			 
		Two arms came into being from four lengths;
		the thighs and legs, the belly and the chest
 became such limbs as never had been seen.
 			 
 And every former shape was canceled there:
that perverse image seemed to share in both-
and none; and so, and slowly, it moved on.
 			 
	Just as the lizard, when it darts from hedge
			to hedge, beneath the dog days' giant lash,
	seems, if it cross one's path, a lightning flash,
 			 
so seemed a blazing little serpent moving
		against the bellies of the other two,
		as black and livid as a peppercorn.
 			 
		Attacking one of them, it pierced right through
		the part where we first take our nourishment;
	and then it fell before him at full length.
 			 
		The one it had transfixed stared but said nothing;
in fact he only stood his ground and yawned
as one whom sleep or fever has undone.
 			 
		The serpent stared at him, he at the serpent;
one through his wound, the other through his mouth
were smoking violently; their smoke met.
 			 
Let Lucan now be silent, where he sings
		of sad Sabellus and Nasidius,
and wait to hear what flies off from my bow.
 			 
Let Ovid now be silent, where he tells
	of Cadmus, Arethusa; if his verse
has made of one a serpent, one a fountain,
 			 
I do not envy him; he never did
		transmute two natures, face to face, so that
		both forms were ready to exchange their matter.
 			 
		These were the ways they answered to each other:
	the serpent split its tail into a fork;
	the wounded sinner drew his steps together.
 			 
		The legs and then the thighs along with them
	so fastened to each other that the juncture
	soon left no sign that was discernible.
 			 
Meanwhile the cleft tail took upon itself
			the form the other gradually lost;
its skin grew soft, the other's skin grew hard.
 			 
I saw the arms that drew in at his armpits
	and also saw the monster's two short feet
		grow long for just as much as those were shortened.
 			 
The serpent's hind feet, twisted up together,
became the member that man hides; just as
	the wretch put out two hind paws from his member.
 			 
And while the smoke veils each with a new color,
and now breeds hair upon the skin of one,
	just as it strips the hair from off the other,
 			 
		the one rose up, the other fell; and yet
they never turned aside their impious eyelamps,
beneath which each of them transformed his snout:
 			 
		he who stood up drew his back toward the temples,
			and from the excess matter growing there
came ears upon the cheeks that had been bare;
 			 
		whatever had not been pulled back but kept,
superfluous, then made his face a nose
and thickened out his lips appropriately.
 			 
		He who was lying down thrust out his snout;
		and even as the snail hauls in its horns,
	he drew his ears straight back into his head;
 			 
		his tongue, which had before been whole and fit
	for speech, now cleaves; the other's tongue, which had
		been forked, now closes up; and the smoke stops.
 			 
The soul that had become an animal,
			now hissing, hurried off along the valley;
	the other one, behind him, speaks and spits.
 			 
		And then he turned aside his new-made shoulders
			and told the third soul: "I'd have Buoso run
			on all fours down this road, as I have done."
 			 
And so I saw the seventh ballast change
and rechange; may the strangeness plead for me
if there's been some confusion in my pen.
 			 
	And though my eyes were somewhat blurred, my mind
bewildered, those three sinners did not flee
	so secretly that I could not perceive
 			 
		Puccio Sciancato clearly, he who was
	the only soul who'd not been changed among
			the three companions we had met at first;
 			 
 	the other one made you, Gaville, grieve.
